While frequently an imperialist project, colonialism functions through differentiating between the targeted land and people, and that of the colonizers.
Its claimed territory has an area of 176,120 square kilometres (68,000sqmi), with approximately 6.2million people as of 2024.
The continent includes mainland Australia, Tasmania, the island of New Guinea, the Aru Islands, the Ashmore and Cartier Islands, most of the Coral Sea Islands, and some other nearby islands.
Law is a set of rules that are created and enforced by governmental or societal institutions to regulate behavior, with its precise definition a matter of longstanding debate.
Lobsters are malacostracan decapod crustaceans of the family Nephropidae or its synonym Homaridae.
Cambodia, officially the Kingdom of Cambodia, is a country in Mainland Southeast Asia.
It covers an area of 923,769 square kilometres (356,669mi2).
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to birds:
It borders the Black Sea to the north; Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Iran to the east; Iraq, Syria, and the Mediterranean Sea to the south; and the Aegean Sea, Greece, and Bulgaria to the west.
Alberto Anchart was an Argentine actor.
It extends from the Baltic Sea in the north to the Sudetes and Carpathian Mountains in the south, and borders Lithuania and Russia to the northeast; Belarus and Ukraine to the east; Slovakia and the Czech Republic to the south; and Germany to the wes
It has an eighth of the average density of Earth, but is over 95 times more massive.
It is a steely-grey, lustrous, hard, and brittle transition metal.
The continent of Australia, sometimes known in technical contexts as Sahul, Australia-New Guinea, Australinea, or Meganesia to distinguish it from the country of Australia, is located within the Southern and Eastern hemispheres, near the Maritime Sou
The tomb is the centrepiece of a 17-hectare (42-acre) complex, which includes a mosque and a guest house, and is set in formal gardens bounded on three sides by a crenellated wall.
While sushi has numerous styles and presentations, the current defining component is the vinegared rice, also known as shari (), or sumeshi ().
In multicellular organisms, stem cells are undifferentiated or partially differentiated cells that can change into various types of cells and proliferate indefinitely to produce more of the same stem cell.
Three of their five pairs of legs have claws, including the first pair, which are usually much larger than the others.
The chemical elements are distinguished from each other by the number of protons that are in their atoms.
It is one of only two extant species in the family Hippopotamidae, the other being the pygmy hippopotamus.
Argentina, officially the Argentine Republic, is a country in the Southern Cone of South America.
Geology is a branch of natural science concerned with the Earth and other astronomical bodies, the rocks of which they are composed, and the processes by which they change over time.
A film, movie, or motion picture is a work of visual art that simulates experiences and otherwise communicates ideas, stories, perceptions, emotions, or atmosphere through the use of moving images that are generally, since the 1930s, synchronized wit
Two of the extant species are native to Africa, and three to South and Southeast Asia.
Viruses are found in almost every ecosystem on Earth and are the most numerous type of biological entity.
It is the largest country in the world, spanning eleven time zones and sharing land borders with fourteen countries.
Prior to the Roman period, most of these regions were officially unified only once under the Kingdom of Macedon from 338 to 323BC.
It is often used to control source code by programmers who are developing software collaboratively.
The evolutionary history of scorpions goes back to the Silurian Period, approximately 430 million years ago.
Oman, officially the Sultanate of Oman, is a country in the southeastern Arabian Peninsula in West Asia.
Believed to have been created by Charlemagne, Andorra was ruled by the count of Urgell until 988, when it was transferred to the Diocese of Urgell.
At the top of the ticket, Franklin D.
Sweden, formally the Kingdom of Sweden, is a Nordic country located on the Scandinavian Peninsula in Northern Europe.
The pitch is controlled by opening and closing holes in the body to change the effective length of the tube.
During the non-equilibrium transformation the system is at constant volume and in contact with a heat reservoir.
In cryptography, encryption is the process of transforming information in a way that, ideally, only authorized parties can decode.
Thermodynamics is a branch of physics that deals with heat, work, and temperature, and their relation to energy, entropy, and the physical properties of matter and radiation.
Chemistry also addresses the nature of chemical bonds in chemical compounds.
It is employed in many fields of science, manufacturing, and business, as well as its more direct uses for art, film and video production, recreational purposes, hobby, and mass communication.
The publication of Copernicus's model in his book De revolutionibus orbium coelestium, just before his death in 1543, was a major event in the history of science, triggering the Copernican Revolution and making a pioneering contribution to the Scient
Claudiney Batista dos Santos is a Brazilian Paralympian athlete competing in category F57/T57 throwing events.
His philosophical teachings, called Confucianism, emphasized personal and governmental morality, harmonious social relationships, righteousness, kindness, sincerity, and a ruler's responsibilities to lead by virtue.
The musical style is a synthesis of a wide range of techniques, but rapping is frequent enough that it has become a defining characteristic.
It is a semi-solid emulsion at room temperature, consisting of approximately 81% butterfat.
A banana is an elongated, edible fruit that is botanically a berry produced by several kinds of large treelike herbaceous flowering plants in the genus Musa.
Population, a group of human individuals
As an informal and colloquial grouping, they correspond to large members of the infraorder Cetacea, i.e.
Cervidae is divided into subfamilies Cervinae and Capreolinae.
It is the southernmost country in the world and the closest to Antarctica, extending along a narrow strip of land between the Andes Mountains and the Pacific Ocean.
Victoria was Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland from 20 June 1837 until her death in 1901.
A fainting couch is a modern term describing a couch with a back traditionally raised at one end.
Pococera asperatella, the maple webworm moth, is a moth of the family Pyralidae.
Continents are generally identified by convention rather than any strict criteria.
Similar in size and mass to Earth, Venus has no liquid water, and its atmosphere is far thicker and denser than that of any other rocky body in the Solar System.
Mozambique, officially the Republic of Mozambique, is a country in Southeast Africa bordered by the Indian Ocean to the east, Tanzania to the north, Malawi and Zambia to the northwest, Zimbabwe to the west, and Eswatini and South Africa to the south 
The First Crusade was proclaimed by Pope Urban II at the Council of Clermont in November 1095a call to arms for Christians to reconquer Jerusalem from the Muslims, with promises of spiritual reward.
Timor-Leste, also known as East Timor, officially the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, is a country in Southeast Asia.
The continent, which has long been home to the majority of the human population, was the site of many of the first civilisations.
Three living species are currently recognised: the African bush elephant, the African forest elephant, and the Asian elephant.
Regarded as one of the greatest composers in the history of Western music, he was mentored during the Classical period, and his musical style was a key driver of the transition to Romantic music, and the expansion of instrumental forms such as the sy
He won a silver medal in the javelin throw at the 2012 Paralympics and a gold medal in the discus throw at the 2016 Rio Games.
Colobothea femorosa is a species of beetle in the family Cerambycidae.
Turing is widely considered to be the father of theoretical computer science.
He grew up in Michigan with little formal schooling and began working at a young age.
Machu Picchu is a 15th-century Inca citadel located in the Eastern Cordillera of southern Peru on a mountain ridge at 2,430 meters (7,970ft).
It is a rare-earth element in the lanthanide series with a metallic silver luster.
These are the most widely used computer networks, used globally in home and small office networks to link devices and to provide Internet access with wireless routers and wireless access points in public places such as coffee shops, restaurants, hote
Yoyetta nigrimontana is a species of cicada, also known as the small southern ambertail, in the true cicada family, Cicadettinae subfamily and Cicadettini tribe.
It borders Senegal to its north and Guinea to its southeast.
The de facto capital has been Jilib since 2014.
Scotland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom, consisting of the northern part of the island of Great Britain and adjacent islands, principally in the archipelagos of the Hebrides and the Northern Isles.
It lies in the Mahalangur Himal sub-range of the Himalayas and marks part of the ChinaNepal border at its summit.
Genetics is the study of genes, genetic variation, and heredity in organisms.
Greenland is an autonomous territory of the Kingdom of Denmark and is the largest of the kingdom's three constituent parts by land area, the others being Denmark proper and the Faroe Islands.
Lithuania covers an area of 65,300km2 (25,200sqmi), and has a population of 2.9 million.
Located at the Plaza de la Villa, it consists of a bronze sculpture designed by Mariano Benlliure representing lvaro de Bazna noted 16th century Admiral of the Spanish Navy once described by Cervantes as "father of soldiers, lightning of war, fortuna
Al-Shabaab aims to control Somalia and govern the country by imposing a strict interpretation of the Wahhabi ideology, although its government remains unrecognized.
Nuclear Energy (sculpture), a bronze sculpture by Henry Moore in the University of Chicago.
Formerly the colony of Spanish Guinea, its post-independence name refers to its location both near the Equator and in the African region of Guinea.
Rosalind Elsie Franklin was an English chemist and X-ray crystallographer.
The Milky Way or Milky Way Galaxy, or simply the Galaxy, is the galaxy that includes the Solar System, with the name describing the galaxy's appearance from Earth: a hazy band of light seen in the night sky formed from stars in other arms of the gala
Japan is an island country in East Asia.
Galileo di Vincenzo Bonaiuti de' Galilei, commonly referred to as Galileo Galilei, was an Italian astronomer, physicist, engineer and polymath.
It is a rational and critical inquiry that reflects on its methods and assumptions.
A freshly exposed surface of pure copper has a pinkish-orange color.
The Second Continental Congress, as the provisional government, established the Continental Army and appointed George Washington as its commander-in-chief in 1775.
Tuberculosis, also known colloquially as the "white death", or historically as consumption, is a contagious disease usually caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) bacteria.
Europe shares the landmass of Eurasia with Asia, and of Afro-Eurasia with both Africa and Asia.
The Crooks fluctuation theorem (CFT), sometimes known as the Crooks equation, is an equation in statistical mechanics that relates the work done on a system during a non-equilibrium transformation to the free energy difference between the final and t
The safety and effectiveness of vaccines has been widely studied and verified.
He is a key figure in the 17th-century Scientific Revolution, best known for his laws of planetary motion, and his books Astronomia nova, Harmonice Mundi, and Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae.
As the founder of the Peripatetic school of philosophy in the Lyceum in Athens, he began the wider Aristotelian tradition that followed, which set the groundwork for the development of modern science.
Yogurt is most commonly made from cow's milk, but milk from water buffalo, goats, ewes, mares, camels, and yaks can also be used.
Rooted in 1950s rock and roll and 1960s garage rock, punk bands rejected the overproduction and corporate nature of mainstream arena rock.
The term cold war is used because there was no direct fighting between the two superpowers, though each supported opposing sides in regional conflicts known as proxy wars.
Mathematics is a field of knowledge concerned with abstract concepts such as numbers, geometric shapes, sets, functions, and probabilities.
Slovakia, officially the Slovak Republic, is a landlocked country in Central Europe.
His book Philosophi Naturalis Principia Mathematica, first published in 1687, achieved the first great unification in physics and established classical mechanics.
Other key markers of the genre are the disc jockey (DJ), turntablism, scratching, beatboxing, and instrumental tracks.
It was discovered by Friedrich Oskar Giesel in 1902, who gave it the name emanium; the element got its name by being wrongly identified with a substance Andr-Louis Debierne found in 1899 and called actinium.
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to reptiles:
Common phenomena are related to electricity, including lightning, static electricity, electric heating, electric discharges and many others.
Leonardo is widely regarded as a genius who epitomised the Renaissance humanist ideal, and his collective works contributed to the development of European art to an extent rivalled only by that of his younger contemporary Michelangelo.
The koala, sometimes inaccurately called the koala bear, is an arboreal herbivorous marsupial native to Australia.
Since each block contains information about the previous block, they effectively form a chain, with each additional block linking to the ones before it.
It is a megadiverse country, and its size gives it a wide variety of landscapes and climates, including deserts in the interior and tropical rainforests along the coast.
Population (journal), published by Institut national d'tudes dmographiques
The Arctic is the polar region of Earth that surrounds the North Pole, lying north of the Arctic Circle.
A blockchain is a distributed ledger with growing lists of records (blocks) that are securely linked together via cryptographic hashes.
Alan Mathison Turing was an English mathematician, computer scientist, logician, cryptanalyst, philosopher and theoretical biologist.
Some are referred to as territorial displays by the male.
Colombia, officially the Republic of Colombia, is a country located in South America, with insular regions in North America.
Occupying 652,864 square kilometers (252,072sqmi) of land, the country is predominantly mountainous with plains in the north and the southwest, which are separated by the Hindu Kush mountain range.
Islamabad is the nation's capital, while Karachi is its largest city and financial centre.
It is a part of the Caucasus region and is bordered by Turkey to the west, Georgia to the north, Azerbaijan to the east, and Iran and the Azerbaijani exclave of Nakhchivan to the south.
The behavior of these quantities is governed by the four laws of thermodynamics, which convey a quantitative description using measurable macroscopic physical quantities but may be explained in terms of microscopic constituents by statistical mechani
A deer or true deer is a hoofed ruminant ungulate of the family Cervidae.
Each team tries to score points by grounding a ball on the other team's court under organized rules.
It borders Russia to the east and Belarus to the southeast and shares a maritime border with Sweden to the west.
This frequency is the approximate upper audible limit of human hearing in healthy young adults.
He rose to prominence as a general during the French Revolution and led a series of military campaigns across Europe and the Middle East during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars.
The process of evolution has given rise to biodiversity at every level of biological organisation.
A molecule is a group of two or more atoms that are held together by attractive forces known as chemical bonds; depending on context, the term may or may not include ions that satisfy this criterion.
Comprising over 17,000 islands, including Sumatra, Java, Sulawesi, and parts of Borneo and New Guinea, Indonesia is the world's largest archipelagic state and the 14th-largest country by area, at 1,904,569 square kilometres.
It is one of six independent Turkic states.
An orchestra is a large instrumental ensemble typical of classical music or jazz, which combines instruments from different families.
The brass section, including the French horn, trumpet, trombone, and tuba, and sometimes cornet and euphonium
Cleopatra VII Thea Philopator was Queen of the Ptolemaic Kingdom of Egypt from 51 to 30BC, and the last active Hellenistic pharaoh.
Nigeria, officially the Federal Republic of Nigeria, is a country in West Africa between the Sahel to the north and the Gulf of Guinea in the Atlantic Ocean to the south.
It is the second-largest country in Europe after Russia, which borders it to the east and northeast.
A person who operates a camera to capture or take photographs is called a photographer, while the captured image, also known as a photograph, is the result produced by the camera.
There are three living species: Grvy's zebra, the plains zebra, and the mountain zebra.
Catchy rhythms, stressed by handclaps and extemporaneous body movements, are an important hallmark of soul.
Based on a free-market ideology, bitcoin was invented in 2008 when an unknown person published a white paper under the pseudonym of Satoshi Nakamoto.
The word mosquito is Spanish and Portuguese for little fly.
Yogurt is a food produced by bacterial fermentation of milk.
Emma Hrdelin is a Swedish musician.
An egg is an organic vessel grown by an animal to carry a possibly fertilized egg cell  a zygote.
The International Space Station (ISS) is a space station in low Earth orbit (LEO).
With an estimated population of more than 53.3 million as of mid-2025, it is the 27th-most populous country in the world and the seventh-most populous in Africa.
Docker is a set of products that uses operating system-level virtualization to deliver software in packages called containers.
They are the earliest type of cell in a cell lineage.
Matthijs van de Sande Bakhuyzen narrates the story of Dennis, a teenage boy who moves to Amsterdam from the countryside.
Latvia, officially the Republic of Latvia, is a country in the Baltic region of northern Europe.
His massenergy equivalence formula E = mc2, which arises from special relativity, has been called "the world's most famous equation".
Dysprosium is never found in nature as a free element, though, like other lanthanides, it is found in various minerals, such as xenotime.
Mexico covers 1,972,550km2, and is the thirteenth-largest country in the world by land area.
Black Seeds is the third studio album by The Main Ingredient.
She won the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry "[for] the discovery of the elements radium and polonium, by the isolation of radium and the study of the nature and compounds of this remarkable element".
His expeditions were the first known European contact with the Caribbean and Central and South America.
Lovelace is often considered the first computer programmer.
The performance is typically given in an opera house, accompanied by an orchestra or smaller musical ensemble, which since the early 19th century has been led by a conductor.
He led the United States through the American Civil War, defeating the Confederacy and playing a major role in the abolition of slavery.
Proteins perform a vast array of functions within organisms, including catalysing metabolic reactions, DNA replication, responding to stimuli, providing structure to cells and organisms, and transporting molecules from one location to another.
Spanning over 6,400km (4,000mi) on land, it played a central role in facilitating economic, cultural, political, and religious interactions between the Eastern and Western worlds.
It is the only extant representative of the family Phascolarctidae.
Venus is the second planet from the Sun.
Imperialism is the maintaining and extending of power over foreign nations, particularly through expansionism, employing both hard power and soft power.
The Arctic region, from the IERS Reference Meridian travelling east, consists of parts of northern Norway, northernmost Sweden, northern Finland, Russia, the United States (Alaska), Canada, Danish Realm (Greenland), and northern Iceland, along with t
The Comoros, officially the Union of the Comoros, is an archipelagic country made up of three islands in Southeast Africa, located at the northern end of the Mozambique Channel in the Indian Ocean.
Because of its high chemical reactivity, barium is never found in nature as a free element.
Many skylarking displays are in courtship.
Pollutants, the components of pollution, can be either foreign substances/energies or naturally occurring contaminants.
Featuring the southernmost point of continental Europe, it is the largest country in Southern Europe and the fourth-most populous European Union (EU) member state.
Cakes are usually baked, but can be griddled.
His administration focused on dismantling the legacy of apartheid by fostering racial reconciliation, a national peace accord and eventual multiracial democracy.
Norway has a population of approximately 5.6 million, and a total area of 385,207 square kilometres (148,729sqmi).
The concept has also been applied beyond software to other digital resources made available alongside their source files or design documents, such as open-source educational resources, open-source hardware or open-source film.
The Netherlands, informally Holland, is a country in Northwestern Europe, with overseas territories in the Caribbean.
Hassium is a synthetic chemical element; it has symbol Hs and atomic number 108.
Linux is a family of free and open-source software Unix-like operating systems based on the Linux kernel, which was first released on 17 September 1991 by Linus Torvalds.
It is a multidisciplinary science that combines physiology, anatomy, molecular biology, developmental biology, cytology, psychology, physics, computer science, chemistry, medicine, statistics, and mathematical modeling to understand the fundamental a
Located in the centre of the Middle East, it covers the bulk of the Arabian Peninsula and has a land area of about 2,150,000km2 (830,000sqmi), making it the fifth-largest country in Asia, the largest in the Middle East, and the twelfth-largest in the
Other characteristics are a call and response between the lead and backing vocalists, an especially tense vocal sound, and occasional improvisational additions, twirls, and auxiliary sounds.
Sigmund Freud was an Austrian neurologist and the founder of psychoanalysis, a clinical method for evaluating and treating pathologies arising from conflicts in the psyche through dialogue between patient and psychoanalyst, and the distinctive theory
The bacteria ferment the sugars in the milk and produce lactic acid, which acts on milk protein to give yogurt its texture and characteristic tart flavor.
It consists of 26 of the 32 counties of the island of Ireland, with a population of about 5.4million.
Brazil, officially the Federative Republic of Brazil, is the largest country in South America.
It is bordered by South Africa to the south and southeast, Namibia to the west and north, Zambia to the north, and Zimbabwe to the northeast.
The back may be situated completely on one side of the couch or wrapped around and extended to the entire piece, much like a traditional couch.
From 1941 to 1945, Nazi Germany and its collaborators systematically murdered around six million Jews across German-occupied Europe, approximately two-thirds of Europe's Jewish population.
It is bordered by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, Palestine and Israel to the northeast, the Red Sea to the east, Sudan and the Sahara to the south, and Libya to the west.
It uses mathematics, physics, and chemistry to explain their origin and their overall evolution.
Iran, officially the Islamic Republic of Iran, historically known as Persia, is a country in West Asia.
The Panama Canal is an artificial 82-kilometer (51-mile) waterway in Panama that connects the Caribbean Sea with the Pacific Ocean.
Honey is made and stored to nourish bee colonies.
These are different from feeding aggregations, which are congregations of several species of bird at areas of high food availability.
In some countries, cooking bananas are called plantains, distinguishing them from dessert bananas.
Chocolate is a food made from roasted and ground cocoa beans.
Locks at each end lift ships up to Gatun Lake, an artificial fresh water lake 26 meters (85ft) above sea level, created by damming the Chagres River and Lake Alajuela to reduce the amount of excavation work required for the canal.
Its border with the United States is the longest international land border.
Fibers are used instead of cables because signals travel along them with less loss and are immune to electromagnetic interference.
It is one of three Baltic states and lies on the eastern shore of the Baltic Sea, bordered by Latvia to the north, Belarus to the east and south, Poland to the south, and the Russian semi-exclave of Kaliningrad Oblast to the southwest, with a maritim
It is an elementary particle that comprises the ordinary matter that makes up the universe, along with up and down quarks.
Such a "work" is typically a collaboration between a composer and a librettist and incorporates a number of the performing arts, such as acting, scenery, costume, and sometimes dance or ballet.
Released in 1971 this is the last album to feature original lead singer Donald McPherson who had suddenly taken ill with leukaemia, and died unexpectedly not long before the album's release.
Elizabeth Danielyan, better known as simply Betty, is an Armenian singer.
Johannes Kepler was a German polymath who was an astronomer, mathematician, astrologer, natural philosopher and music theorist.
Laos has a population of more than 7.5 million, and its capital and most populous city is Vientiane.
The objective is to manoeuvre the ball in such a way that the opponent is not able to play a valid return.
The term hot dog can also refer to the sausage itself.
Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci was an Italian polymath of the High Renaissance who was active as a painter, draughtsman, engineer, scientist, theorist, sculptor, and architect.
Ludwig van Beethoven was a German composer, conductor, and pianist.
The woodwind section, including the flute, oboe, clarinet, and bassoon, and sometimes piccolo, cor anglais, bass clarinet, contrabassoon, and saxophone
Active solar techniques include the use of photovoltaic systems, concentrated solar power, and solar water heating to harness the energy.
It shares boundaries with Nigeria to the west and north, Chad to the northeast, the Central African Republic to the east, and Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and the Republic of the Congo to the south.
The men's team sprint race of the 201516 ISU Speed Skating World Cup 4, arranged in the Thialf arena in Heerenveen, Netherlands, was held on 11 December 2015.
Towards the end of the Renaissance, the Reformation marked the beginning of Protestantism.
Turkey, officially the Republic of Trkiye, is a country mainly located in Anatolia in West Asia, with a smaller part called East Thrace in Southeast Europe.
According to Islam, he was the final prophet of God who was divinely inspired to preach and confirm the monotheistic teachings of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and other prophets in Islam.
It is bordered by Thailand to the northwest, Laos to the north, and Vietnam to the east, and has a coastline along the Gulf of Thailand in the southwest.
Originating in present-day Mongolia in East Asia, the medieval empire at its height stretched from the Sea of Japan to Eastern Europe, extending northward into Siberia and east and southward into the Indian subcontinent, mounting invasions of Southea
Lithuania, officially the Republic of Lithuania, is a country in the Baltic region of Europe.
to the east and northeast by Mozambique, and Eswatini, and it encloses Lesotho.
Dysprosium is a chemical element; it has symbol Dy and atomic number 66.
It is a field of research in engineering, mathematics and computer science that develops and studies methods and software that enable machines to perceive their environment and use learning and intelligence to take actions that maximize their chances
Vanilla is a spice derived from orchids of the genus Vanilla, primarily obtained from the seed pods of the flat-leaved Mexican and Central American vanilla (V.planifolia).
Its capital city is Edinburgh, whilst Glasgow is the largest and the most populous of the cities in the country.
Its body is rotund; adult individuals weigh 100 to 115kg and are typically 1.2 to 1.9m long.
Timor-Leste shares a land border with Indonesia to the west; Australia is the country's southern neighbour, across the Timor Sea.
A hot dog is a grilled, steamed, or boiled sausage served in the slit of a partially sliced bun.
She significantly reduced death rates by improving hygiene and living standards.
all cetaceans apart from dolphins and porpoises.
Country music, also known as country and western or simply country, is a music genre originating from the United States.
Although few details of his life are known, based on his surviving work, he is considered one of the leading scientists in classical antiquity, and one of the greatest mathematicians of all time.
The hippopotamus, often shortened to hippo, further qualified as the common hippopotamus, Nile hippopotamus and river hippopotamus, is a large semiaquatic mammal native to sub-Saharan Africa.
Afghanistan, officially the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, is a landlocked country located at the crossroads of Central and South Asia.
The territory of Estonia consists of the mainland, the larger islands of Saaremaa and Hiiumaa, and over 2,300 other islands and islets on the east coast of the Baltic Sea.
Photography is the art, application, and practice of creating images by recording light, either electronically by means of an image sensor, or chemically by means of a light-sensitive material such as photographic film.
The wolf is the largest wild extant member of the family Canidae, and is further distinguished from other Canis species by its less pointed ears and muzzle, as well as a shorter torso and a longer tail.
Walter Henry Halas was an American baseball player and coach of American football, basketball, and baseball.
It comprises England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, with a population of over 69 million in 2024.
The name "Silk Road" was coined in the late 19th century, but some 20th- and 21st-century historians instead prefer the term Silk Routes, on the grounds that it more accurately describes the intricate web of land and sea routes connecting Central, Ea
It describes the population shift from rural to urban areas, the corresponding decrease in the proportion of people living in rural areas, and the ways in which societies and culture adapt to this change.
Globalization is the process of increasing interdependence and integration among the economies, markets, societies, and cultures of different countries worldwide.
The Holocaust, known in Hebrew as the Shoah, was the genocide of European Jews during World WarII.
Computer security is a subdiscipline within the field of information security.
Open source or open-source model is the production of digital content whose source code or source files are publicly available, enabling use, study, modification, and redistribution.
Beryllium is a chemical element; it has symbol Be and atomic number 4.
Alexander III of Macedon, most commonly known as Alexander the Great, was king of the ancient Greek kingdom of Macedon.
One of two communist states in Southeast Asia, Vietnam is bordered by China to the north, and Laos and Cambodia to the west; it lies along the Gulf of Thailand to the southwest and the South China Sea to the east, where it has shared and disputed mar
Citizens of Greenland are citizens of Denmark.
Argentina shares the bulk of the Southern Cone with Chile to the west, and is also bordered by Bolivia and Paraguay to the north, Brazil to the northeast, Uruguay and the South Atlantic Ocean to the east, and the Drake Passage to the south.
It is bordered to the north by the Arctic Ocean, to the east by the Atlantic Ocean, to the southeast by South America and the Caribbean Sea, and to the south and west by the Pacific Ocean.
Fruit trees of the orchard or domestic apple, the most widely grown in the genus, are cultivated worldwide.
It is an essential source of renewable energy, and its technologies are broadly characterized as either passive solar or active solar depending on how they capture and distribute solar energy or convert it into solar power.
The related term "raven" is not linked scientifically to any certain trait but is rather a general grouping for larger-sized species of Corvus.
Each block contains a cryptographic hash of the previous block, a timestamp, and transaction data.
It also controlled parts of southeastern Central Europe between the early 16th and early 18thcenturies.
A rookery is a colony of breeding rooks, and more broadly a colony of several types of breeding animals, generally, gregarious birds.
The Grand Canyon is a steep-sided canyon carved by the Colorado River in Arizona, United States.
Electricity is related to magnetism, both being part of the phenomenon of electromagnetism, as described by Maxwell's equations.
It can be a liquid, solid, or paste.
Electricity is the set of physical phenomena associated with the presence and motion of matter possessing an electric charge.
It is a transparent, tasteless, odorless, and nearly colorless chemical substance.
The fruit is variable in size, color and firmness, but is usually elongated and curved, with soft flesh rich in starch covered with a peel, which may have a variety of colors when ripe.
It is bordered by Kazakhstan to the north, Kyrgyzstan to the northeast, Tajikistan to the southeast, Afghanistan to the south, and Turkmenistan to the south-west.
The Russian Revolution was a period of political and social change in Russia, starting in 1917.
William Shakespeare was an English playwright, poet and actor.
The territory has a varied landscape, diverse ecosystems, and a temperate climate.
It began in the aftermath of the Second World War and ended with the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.
They are the tallest living terrestrial animals and the largest ruminants on Earth.
At its height in the 19th and early 20th centuries, it was the largest empire in history and, for a century, was the foremost global power.
It is situated in the Machupicchu District of Urubamba Province about 80 kilometers northwest of Cusco, above the Sacred Valley and along the Urubamba River, which forms a deep canyon with a subtropical mountain climate.
In quantum physics, organic chemistry, and biochemistry, the distinction from ions is dropped and molecule is often used when referring to polyatomic ions.
They are made of an umbrella-shaped main body made of mesoglea, known as the bell, and a collection of trailing tentacles on the underside.
Radioactive decay is the process by which an unstable atomic nucleus loses energy by radiation.
Physics is the scientific study of matter, its fundamental constituents, its motion and behavior through space and time, and the related entities of energy and force.
While individual neurons are simple, many of them together in a network can perform complex tasks.
This process converts the original representation of the information, known as plaintext, into an alternative form known as ciphertext.
The most widely used renewable energy types are solar energy, wind power, and hydropower.
The gross domestic product (GDP) in Greater Hiroshima, Hiroshima Urban Employment Area, was US$61.3 billion as of 2010.
It focuses on the Parthian religious thinker Mani, founder of Manichaeism.
Pure electronic instruments depend entirely on circuitry-based sound generation, for instance using devices such as an electronic oscillator, theremin, or synthesizer: no acoustic waves need to be previously generated by mechanical means and then con
It is one of only two doubly landlocked countries in the world, the other being Liechtenstein.
The disease is caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis and is spread by fleas and through the air.
Mercury (element), a chemical element
The name comes from Ancient Greek   (g)'earth' and  o (-loga)'study of, discourse'.
Traditional folk music has been defined in several ways: as music transmitted orally, music with unknown composers, music that is played on traditional instruments, music about cultural or national identity, music that changes between generations, mu
Bats are more agile in flight than most birds, flying with their long spread-out digits covered with a thin membrane or patagium.
Qatar, officially the State of Qatar, is a country in West Asia.
A material containing unstable nuclei is considered radioactive.
It is an actinide element, the sixth transuranium element to be synthesized, and has the second-highest atomic mass of all elements that have been produced in amounts large enough to see with the naked eye.
Italy shares land borders with France to the west; Switzerland and Austria to the north; Slovenia to the east; and the two enclaves of Vatican City and San Marino.
The following is a list of terms used in bird topography:
It is one of the three Baltic states, along with Estonia to the north and Lithuania to the south.
Florence Nightingale was an English social reformer, statistician and the founder of modern nursing.
This period saw Russia abolish its monarchy and adopt a socialist form of government following two successive revolutions and a civil war.
Zebras share the genus Equus with horses and asses, the three groups being the only living members of the family Equidae.
Neurons can be either biological cells or mathematical models.
Species of rats are found throughout the order Rodentia, with the genus Rattus containing the most familiar rats.
With a population of more than 242 million, it is the most populous country in Africa, and the world's sixth-most populous country.
Its height was most recently measured in 2020 through a joint survey by Nepalese and Chinese authorities as 8,848.86m.
Proteins differ from one another primarily in their sequence of amino acids, which is dictated by the nucleotide sequence of their genes, and which usually results in protein folding into a specific 3D structure that determines its activity.
The percussion section, including the timpani, snare drum, bass drum, cymbals, triangle, tambourine, tam-tam and mallet percussion instruments.
Siddhartha Gautama, most commonly referred to as the Buddha, was a wandering ascetic and religious teacher who lived in the eastern Indo-Gangetic Plains during the 6th or 5th centuryBCE and founded Buddhism.
It is located on the southern coast of the Gulf of Aden and bordered by Djibouti to the northwest, Ethiopia to the south and west, and Somalia to the east.
It is a divalent element that occurs naturally only in combination with other elements to form minerals.
Fluorine is a chemical element; it has the symbol F and atomic number 9.
Just beyond it lies southwestern Iran, where the region transitions into the Persian plateau, marking the shift from the Arab world to Iran.
Estonia, officially the Republic of Estonia, is a country in the Baltic region of Northern Europe.
By this time, the papacy's position as head of the Catholic Church had strengthened, and earlier conflicts with secular rulers and wars on the frontiers of Western Christendom had prepared it for the direction of armed force in religious causes.
Laos, officially the Lao People's Democratic Republic (LPDR), is a country in Mainland Southeast Asia, and the only landlocked country in Southeast Asia.
The term globalization first appeared in the early 20th century, but came into popular use in the 1990s to describe the growing international connectivity of the postCold War world.
The reigning champions are Argentina, who won their third title at the 2022 World Cup by defeating France.
Its name comes from the Ancient Greek for "river horse" ().
The largest of the three is Horseshoe Falls, which straddles the international border of the two countries.
The capital and largest city is Maputo.
It lies between the Baltic Sea and the North Sea to the north with the Alps to the south.
Whales are a widely distributed and diverse group of fully aquatic placental marine mammals.
Mercury (mythology), a Roman deity.
A neural network is a group of interconnected units called neurons that send signals to one another.
Rock and pop music remained roughly synonymous until the late 1960s, after which pop became associated with music that was more commercial, ephemeral, and accessible.
She is best known for her live shows and live renditions of her own songs.
Ireland, also known as the Republic of Ireland, is a country in Northwestern Europe.
Transfusions are used for various medical conditions to replace lost components of the blood.
In astronomy and cosmology, dark matter is an invisible and hypothetical form of matter that does not interact with electromagnetic radiation, including light.
At no more than 200km (120mi) north to south and 130km (81mi) east to west, Eswatini is one of the smallest countries in Africa.
With roots in blues rock, psychedelic rock and acid rock, heavy metal bands developed a thick, monumental sound characterized by distorted guitars, extended guitar solos, emphatic beats and loudness.
It includes both music made using electronic and electromechanical means.
Chromium is a chemical element; it has symbol Cr and atomic number 24.
Belgium covers an area of 30,689km2 (11,849sqmi) and has a population of more than 11.8 million; its population density of 383/km2 (990/sqmi) ranks 22nd in the world and sixth in Europe.
This basin encompasses 7millionkm2 (2.7millionsqmi), of which 6millionkm2 (2.3millionsqmi) are covered by the rainforest.
The UK includes the island of Great Britain, the north-eastern part of the island of Ireland, and most of the smaller islands within the British Isles, covering 94,354 square miles (244,376km2).
His proposition that all species of life have descended from a common ancestor is now generally accepted and considered a fundamental scientific concept.
Aristotle was an ancient Greek philosopher and polymath.
The Ottoman Empire, historically also known as the Turkish Empire or Turkey, was a state that spanned much of Southeastern Europe, West Asia, and North Africa from the 14thcentury to the early 20thcentury, centred in modern-day Turkey.
Angkor Wat is a Vaishnava Hindu and Theravada Buddhist temple complex in Siem Reap, Cambodia, and the largest religious complex in the world.
The city was captured on 29 May 1453 as part of the culmination of a 53-day siege which had begun on 6 April.
It is a physical science within the natural sciences that studies matter: composition, structure, properties, behavior and the changes they undergo during reactions with other substances.
Some members of the family are typically packaged as a distribution, which includes the kernel alongside supporting system software and libraries developed by third partiessuch as GNU, Red Hat, and X.Orgto create a complete operating system; however,
The history of ancient Egypt unfolded as a series of stable kingdoms interspersed by the "Intermediate Periods" of relative instability.
Albert Einstein was a German-born theoretical physicist best known for developing the known theory of relativity.
He played college baseball at the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign from 1914 to 1916 as a pitcher for the Fighting Illini.
13th Nova Scotia general election may refer to:Nova Scotia general election, 1826, the 13th general election to take place in the Colony of Nova Scotia, for the 13th General Assembly of Nova Scotia
Nadel Paris is a French singer, songwriter, record producer, dancer, Electronic Dance Music (EDM) artist, and actor from Paris, based in Los Angeles.
The most widespread rabbit genera are Oryctolagus and Sylvilagus.
It is bordered to the north by the Gulf of Finland across from Finland, to the west by the Baltic Sea across from Sweden, to the south by Latvia, and to the east by Russia.
With a population of over 92 million, Iran ranks 17th globally in both geographic size and population.
Albania, officially the Republic of Albania, is a country in Southeast Europe.
Hiroshima  is the capital of Hiroshima Prefecture in Japan.
Andorra was formed as a polity by a charter in 1278, being a lordship within the Principality of Catalonia until 1715.
Luxembourg, officially the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, is a landlocked country in Western Europe.
It is the product of the International Space Station program and is operated by five partner space agencies: NASA, Roscosmos (Russia), ESA (Europe), JAXA (Japan), and CSA (Canada).
Its overseas regions and territories include French Guiana in South America, Saint Pierre and Miquelon in the North Atlantic, the French West Indies, and many islands in Oceania and the Indian Ocean.
It is also the world's fifth-largest country by area and the seventh-largest by population, with over 213 million people.
Francis Joseph "Frank" Ryan was an American public relations executive and sports announcer who was the first play-by-play announcer for the Boston Bruins and publicity director for the Bruins, Harvard University, and Suffolk Downs.
It is culturally and politically linked with Europe and is the region's westernmost and most sparsely populated country.
Mosquitoes have a slender, segmented body, one pair of wings, three pairs of long hair-like legs, and a specialized, highly elongated, proboscis, adapted for piercing and sucking.
Switzerland is geographically divided among the Swiss Alps, the Swiss Plateau, and the Jura Mountains; the Alps cover most of the country's territory, whereas the majority of its 9 million people are concentrated on the plateau, which hosts many of t
The potato is a starchy tuberous vegetable native to the Americas that is consumed as a staple food in many parts of the world.
The Sun is the star located at the centre of the Solar System.
The electron is a subatomic particle whose electric charge is negative one elementary charge.
It borders the Mediterranean Sea to the north, Egypt to the east, Sudan to the southeast, Chad to the south, Niger to the southwest, Algeria to the west, and Tunisia to the northwest.
Nikola Tesla was a Serbian-American engineer, futurist, and inventor.
First drafted by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Cardinal Stephen Langton, to make peace between the unpopular king and a group of rebel barons who demanded that the King confirm the Charter of Liberties, it promised the protection of church rights, pr
Indonesia has significant areas of wilderness that support one of the world's highest levels of biodiversity.
It consists of an outer ring of vertical sarsen standing stones, each around 13 feet (4.0m) high, seven feet (2.1m) wide, and weighing around 25 tons, topped by connecting horizontal lintel stones which are held in place with mortise and tenon joints
Colonialism is the practice of extending and maintaining political, social, economic, and cultural domination over a territory and its people by another people in pursuit of interests defined in an often distant metropole, who also claim superiority.
Scorpions are predatory arachnids with eight legs, a pair of grasping pincers and a narrow, segmented tail, often carried in a characteristic forward curve over the back and always ending with a stinger.
Libya, officially the State of Libya, is a country in the Maghreb region of North Africa.
The saxophone is a type of single-reed woodwind instrument with a conical body, usually made of brass.
Her work was central to the understanding of the molecular structures of DNA, RNA, viruses, coal, and graphite.
In 1876, the British parliament voted to grant her the additional title of Empress of India.
Giraffes are large African hoofed mammals.
The leopard is one of the five extant cat species in the genus Panthera.
Norway, officially the Kingdom of Norway, is a Nordic country comprising the western and northernmost parts of the Scandinavian Peninsula in Northern Europe, the remote Arctic island Jan Mayen and the archipelago Svalbard.
Turkmenistan is a landlocked country in Central Asia, bordered by Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan to the north, Afghanistan to the southeast, Iran to the south and southwest, and the Caspian Sea to the west.
Jellyfish, also known as sea jellies or simply jellies, are the medusa-phase of certain gelatinous members of the subphylum Medusozoa, which is a major part of the phylum Cnidaria.
A hamburger, often known as a burger, consists of fillingsusually a patty of panfried or grilled ground meat, typically beefplaced inside a sliced bun, sesame seed bun, or bread roll.
He was the country's first Black head of state and the first elected in a fully representative democratic election.
Although the term has had many meanings from its origins in the ancient Greek era, by the late 18th century the word had taken on the meaning common today: a work typically consisting of multiple distinct sections or movements, often three or four, w
Astronomy is a natural science that studies celestial objects and the phenomena that occur in the cosmos.
Git is a distributed version control software system that is capable of managing versions of source code or data.
The concept is derived from open-source software, developed based on peer production, with products freely available to the public.
They typically produce short, fast-paced songs with rough, stripped-down vocals and instrumentation, and anti-establishment themes.
These sequences are used to detect and destroy DNA from similar bacteriophages during subsequent infections.
Objects of interest include planets, moons, stars, nebulae, galaxies, meteoroids, asteroids, and comets.
The term computer system may refer to a nominally complete computer that includes the hardware, operating system, software, and peripheral equipment needed and used for full operation, or to a group of computers that are linked and function together,
It is considered one of the events that signified the end of the Middle Ages and the beginning of the early modern period in Europe.
Archimedes anticipated modern calculus and analysis by applying the concept of the infinitesimals and the method of exhaustion to derive and rigorously prove many geometrical theorems, including the area of a circle, the surface area and volume of a 
It is a massive sphere of hot plasma, heated to incandescence by nuclear fusion reactions in its core, radiating the energy from its surface mainly as visible light and infrared radiation with 10% at ultraviolet energies.
Darkly colored and bitter, coffee has a stimulating effect on humans due to its caffeine content, but decaffeinated coffee is also commercially available.
It was commissioned in 1631 by the fifth Mughal emperor, Shah Jahan, to house the tomb of his late wife, Mumtaz Mahal; it also houses the tomb of Shah Jahan himself.
Nuclear binding energy, the energy needed to fuse or split a nucleus of an atom
Situated in a coastal lowland region known as the Low Countries, it is bordered by the Netherlands to the north, Germany to the east, Luxembourg to the southeast, France to the south, and the North Sea to the west.
Mount Everest is the highest mountain on Earth above sea level.
It is a steel-gray, hard, strong, lightweight and brittle alkaline earth metal.
It is an open, upright shrub with light green leaves, branches covered in dense hairs and white flowers in spring.
Construction began under the Emperor Vespasian in 72 and was completed in AD 80 under his successor and heir, Titus.
Each sequence within an individual prokaryotic CRISPR is derived from a DNA fragment of a bacteriophage that had previously infected the prokaryote or one of its ancestors.
Pollution is the introduction of contaminants into the natural environment that cause harm.
They have long bodies with muscular tails and live in crevices or burrows on the sea floor.
Europe is a continent located entirely in the Northern Hemisphere and mostly in the Eastern Hemisphere.
Kopytw-Kolonia is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kode, within Biaa County, Lublin Voivodeship, in eastern Poland, close to the border with Belarus.
Nightingale came to prominence while serving as a manager and trainer of nurses during the Crimean War, in which she organised care for wounded soldiers at Constantinople.
It is a federal republic consisting of 50 states and a federal capital district, Washington, D.C.
South Korea, officially the Republic of Korea (ROK), is a country in East Asia.
Nuclear energy may refer to:Nuclear power, the use of sustained nuclear fission or nuclear fusion to generate heat and electricity
Slavery is the ownership of a person as property, especially in regard to their labour.
Cryptocurrency is a type of digital asset that uses distributed ledger, or blockchain, technology to enable a secure transaction.
While his fame initially rested on his achievements as a painter, he has also become known for his notebooks, in which he made drawings and notes on a variety of subjects, including anatomy, astronomy, botany, cartography, painting, and palaeontology
It is the largest of the four constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
The honorific Mahtm, first applied to him in 1914 in South Africa, is now used throughout the world.
It is bordered by the Arctic Ocean to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the west, the Mediterranean Sea to the south, and Asia to the east.
Djibouti, officially the Republic of Djibouti, is a country in the Horn of Africa, bordered by Somalia to the south, Ethiopia to the southwest, Eritrea in the north, and the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden to the east.
The Aztecs were a Mesoamerican civilization that flourished in central Mexico from 1300 to 1521.
It is a broad natural science that encompasses a wide range of fields and unifying principles that explain the structure, function, growth, origin, evolution, and distribution of life.
It is a type of software interface, offering a service to other pieces of software.
Choral music, in turn, is the music written specifically for such an ensemble to perform or in other words is the music performed by the ensemble.
Fire is the rapid oxidation of a fuel in the exothermic chemical process of combustion, releasing heat, light, and various reaction products.
More than thirty subspecies of Canis lupus have been recognized, including the dog and dingo, though grey wolves, as popularly understood, include only naturally occurring wild subspecies.
With an area of about 331,000 square kilometres and a population of over 102million, it is the world's 16th-most populous country.
Magna Carta, sometimes spelled Magna Charta, is a royal charter of rights sealed by King John of England at Runnymede, near Windsor, on 15 June 1215.
The word laser originated as an acronym for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.
The Gulf of Bahrain, an inlet of the Persian Gulf, separates Qatar from nearby Bahrain.
Solar energy is the radiant energy from the Sun's light and heat, which can be harnessed using a range of technologies such as solar electricity, solar thermal energy and solar architecture.
By the age of 30, he had created one of the largest empires in history, stretching from Greece to northwestern India.
Statistical population, a set of similar items or events which is of interest for some question or experiment
The Reformation, also known as the Protestant Reformation or the European Reformation, was a major theological movement in Western Christianity in 16th-century Europe that posed a religious and political challenge to the papacy and the authority of t
Andorra, officially the Principality of Andorra, is a landlocked country on the Iberian Peninsula, in the eastern Pyrenees in southwestern Europe, bordered by France to the north and Spain to the south.
As of June1, 2019, the city had an estimated population of 1,199,391.
Saudi Arabia, officially the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA), is a country in West Asia.
He completed more than 800 works in his lifeincluding outstanding examples of most of the genres of his time: symphonies, concertos, chamber music, opera, and choral musicand is regarded as one of the greatest composers in the history of Western musi
Gaius Julius Caesar was a Roman general, statesman, and author who was the dictator of the Roman Republic almost continuously from 49 BC until his assassination in 44 BC.
They were built across the historical northern borders of ancient Chinese states and Imperial China as protection against various nomadic groups from the Eurasian Steppe.
It is eaten on its own and used to flavor other foods.
Potatoes are underground stem tubers of the plant Solanum tuberosum, a perennial in the nightshade family Solanaceae.
They are the only surviving members of the family Elephantidae and the order Proboscidea; extinct relatives include mammoths and mastodons.
Ice cream is a frozen dessert typically made from milk or cream that has been flavoured with a sweetener, either sugar or an alternative, and a spice, such as cocoa or vanilla, or with fruit, such as strawberries or peaches.
Bread is a baked food product made from water, flour, and often yeast.
In their oldest forms, cakes were modifications of bread, but cakes now cover a wide range of preparations that can be simple or elaborate and which share features with other desserts such as pastries, meringues, custards, and pies.
It is bordered by South Africa on all sides except the east, where it shares a border with Mozambique.
The Gardens of Light is a 1991 novel by the French-Lebanese writer Amin Maalouf.
Butter is a dairy product made from the fat and protein components of churned cream.
The orange, also called sweet orange to distinguish it from the bitter orange, is the fruit of a tree in the family Rutaceae.
Bazille's Studio is an oil-on-canvas painting created in 1870 by the French Impressionist Frdric Bazille.
It covers an area of 2,780,085km2 (1,073,397mi2), making it the second-largest country in South America after Brazil, the fourth-largest country in the Americas, and the eighth-largest country in the world.
Population may refer to:Population (biology), a group of individuals
Camels have long been domesticated and, as livestock, they provide food and textiles.
Christopher Columbus was an Italian explorer and navigator from the Republic of Genoa who completed four Spanish transatlantic voyages in the name of the Catholic Monarchs, opening the way for the widespread European exploration and colonization of t
The dog is a domesticated descendant of wolves.
The original object, called the progenitor, either collapses to a neutron star or black hole, or is completely destroyed to form a diffuse nebula.
The field takes inspiration from biological neuroscience and revolves around stacking artificial neurons into layers and "training" them to process data.
A vaccine is a biological preparation that provides active acquired immunity to a particular infectious or malignant disease.
The Himalayas, or Himalaya, is a mountain range in Asia separating the plains of the Indian subcontinent from the Tibetan Plateau.
Abraham Lincoln was the 16th president of the United States, serving from 1861 until his assassination in 1865.
Its 16 constituent states have a total population of over 82 million, making it the most populous member state of the European Union (EU).
Ultrasound is sound with frequencies greater than 20 kilohertz.
It is the second-largest Portuguese-speaking (Lusophone) country after Brazil in both total area and population and is the seventh-largest country in Africa.
Archimedes of Syracuse was an Ancient Greek mathematician, physicist, engineer, astronomer, and inventor from the city of Syracuse in Sicily.
NLP is a subfield of computer science and is closely associated with artificial intelligence.
Mexico, officially the United Mexican States, is a country in North America.
Reptiles traditionally comprise four orders: Testudines (turtles), Crocodilia, Squamata and Rhynchocephalia (tuatara), with about 12,000 extant species listed in the Reptile Database.
Bosnia has a moderate continental climate with hot summers and cold, snowy winters.
They are classified under the family Giraffidae, along with their closest extant relative, the okapi.
It began with the overseas possessions and trading posts established by England in the late 16th and early 17th centuries, and colonisation attempts by Scotland during the 17th century.
Ukraine also borders Belarus to the north; Poland and Slovakia to the west; Hungary, Romania and Moldova to the southwest; and the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov to the south and southeast.
In the context of physics, it is characterised as a mechanical wave of pressure or related quantities, whereas in physiological-psychological contexts it implies a hearing process.
It was originally created by Linus Torvalds for version control in the development of the Linux kernel.
In machine learning, deep learning (DL) focuses on utilizing multilayered neural networks to perform tasks such as classification, regression, and representation learning.
Russia, or the Russian Federation, is a country in Eastern Europe and North Asia.
Nuclear reactor, the device used to sustain a controlled fission nuclear chain reaction
Botswana, officially the Republic of Botswana, is a landlocked country in Southern Africa.
In 2022, the country's population was about 5.4 million.
Cameroon, officially the Republic of Cameroon, is a country in Central Africa.
Sound is a phenomenon in which pressure disturbances propagate through an elastic material medium.
Slovakia's mostly mountainous territory spans about 49,000km2 (19,000sqmi), hosting a population exceeding 5.4 million.
It comprises the eastern half of the island of Timor, the coastal exclave of Oecusse in the island's northwest, and the islands of Atauro and Jaco, for a total land area of 15,007 square kilometres (5,794sqmi).
Located on a site measuring 162.6 hectares within the ancient capital of Angkor, it was constructed between 1113 and 1150CE during the reign of the Khmer king Suryavarman II as a Hindu temple dedicated to Vishnu.
They mainly live in deserts but have adapted to a wide range of environmental conditions, and can be found on all continents except Antarctica.
The understanding of the biological basis of learning, memory, behavior, perception, and consciousness has been described by Eric Kandel as the "epic challenge" of the biological sciences.
Barium is a chemical element; it has symbol Ba and atomic number 56.
It was first synthesized in 1950 at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory by bombarding curium with alpha particles.
The Aztec people included different ethnic groups of central Mexico, particularly those groups who spoke the Nahuatl language.
Actinium is a chemical element; it has symbol Ac and atomic number89.
was an American civil rights activist and Baptist minister who was a prominent leader of the civil rights movement from 1955 until his assassination in 1968.
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was an Indian lawyer, anti-colonial nationalist and political ethicist who employed nonviolent resistance to lead the successful campaign for India's independence from British rule, and to later inspire movements for civil 
It is the largest ancient amphitheatre ever built, and is the largest standing amphitheatre in the world.
Bats are winged mammals, the only mammals capable of true and sustained flight.
It is a gas giant, with an average radius of about 9 times that of Earth.
It is characterised by its white coat with black patches around the eyes, ears, legs and shoulders.
Kenya, officially the Republic of Kenya, is a country located in East Africa.
After leading a life of mendicancy, asceticism, and meditation, he attained nirvana at Bodh Gaya in what is now Bihar, India.
Folk music is a music genre that includes traditional folk music and the contemporary genre that evolved from the former during the 20th-century folk revival.
Soul music is a popular music genre that originated in African-American communities throughout the United States in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
Other rat genera include Neotoma, Bandicota and Dipodomys.
Some types of folk music may be called world music.
Of the three, it was the most widespread: It spanned much of Pakistan, northwestern India, and northeast Afghanistan.
The painting is also known as L'Atelier de la rue Condamine, The Studio, and The Studio on the Rue La Condamine.
Its coastline lies on the Bight of Biafra, part of the Gulf of Guinea, and the Atlantic Ocean.
Soup is a primarily liquid food, generally served warm or hot though it is sometimes served chilled made by cooking or otherwise combining meat or vegetables with stock, milk, or water.
The country is about one degree of latitude north of the equator, off the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula, bordering the Strait of Malacca to the west, the Singapore Strait to the south along with the Riau Islands in Indonesia, the South China Se
Its body is slender and muscular, reaching a length of 92183cm (3672in) with a 66102cm (2640in) long tail and a shoulder height of 6070cm (2428in).
If hot enough, the gases may become ionized to produce plasma.
Dogs and the modern gray wolf share a common ancestor.
Guinea-Bissau, officially the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, is a country in West Africa that covers 36,125 square kilometres (13,948sqmi) with an estimated population of 2,080,000.
It was characterized by the European rediscovery and revival of the literary, philosophical, and artistic achievements of classical antiquity.
Sir Isaac Newton was an English polymath who was a mathematician, physicist, astronomer, alchemist, theologian, author and inventor.
Slavery typically involves compulsory work, with the slave's location of work and residence dictated by the party that holds them in bondage.
Tennis is a racket sport that is played either individually against a single opponent (singles) or between two teams of two players each (doubles).
In Western history, the era of classical antiquity was immediately followed by the Early Middle Ages and the Byzantine period.
Viruses infect all life forms, from animals and plants to microorganisms, including bacteria and archaea.
Augusta Ada King, Countess of Lovelace, also known as Ada Lovelace, was an English mathematician and writer chiefly known for work on Charles Babbage's proposed mechanical general-purpose computer, the analytical engine.
Singapore, officially the Republic of Singapore, is an island country in Southeast Asia.
The giant panda, also known as the panda bear or simply panda, is a bear species endemic to China.
He appeared in more than 20 films and television shows between 1954 and 2008.
During the 1950s and 1960s, pop music encompassed rock and roll and the youth-oriented styles it influenced.
Somaliland, officially the Republic of Somaliland, is a partially recognised state in the Horn of Africa.
Widespread endemic diseases with a stable number of infected individuals such as recurrences of seasonal influenza are generally excluded as they occur simultaneously in large regions of the globe rather than being spread worldwide.
It borders Norway to the west and north, and Finland to the east, and shares a maritime border with Denmark to the south.
It is located in the Balkans, on the Adriatic and Ionian Seas within the Mediterranean Sea, and shares land borders with Montenegro to the northwest, Kosovo to the northeast, North Macedonia to the east and Greece to the south.
Poland, officially the Republic of Poland, is a country in Central Europe.
The tournament has been held every four years since the inaugural tournament in 1930, with the exception of 1942 and 1946 due to World War II.
The Roman Empire was a state that dominated the Mediterranean and much of Europe, Western Asia, and North Africa during the classical period.
Brazil is a federation composed of 26 states and a Federal District, which hosts the capital, Braslia.
3D printing, also called additive manufacturing, is the construction of a three-dimensional object from a CAD model or a digital 3D model.
Elemental bismuth occurs naturally, and its sulfide and oxide forms are important commercial ores.
A crow is a bird of the genus Corvus, or more broadly, a synonym for all of Corvus.
He was a key figure in the Scientific Revolution and the Enlightenment that followed.
His compositions have attracted extraordinary casual and scholarly interest, and remain among the most performed in the world.
He is known for his contributions to the design of the modern alternating current (AC) electricity supply system.
His writings span the natural sciences, philosophy, linguistics, economics, politics, psychology, and the arts.
Aztec culture was organized into city-states (altepetl), some of which joined to form alliances, political confederations, or empires.
They have a flattened skull; upright, triangular ears; a pointed, slightly upturned snout; and a long, bushy tail ("brush").
It is bordered by Lebanon to the north, Syria to the northeast, Jordan to the east, and Egypt to the southwest.
Early transfusions used whole blood, but modern medical practice commonly uses only components of the blood, such as red blood cells, plasma, platelets, and other clotting factors.
World population, total number of living humans on Earth.
It is a post-transition metal and one of the pnictogens, with chemical properties resembling its lighter group 15 siblings arsenic and antimony.
Evolution is the change in the heritable characteristics of biological populations over successive generations.
The first walls date to the 7th century BC; these were joined together in the Qin dynasty.
Water is an inorganic compound with the chemical formula H2O.
It is traditionally classified into nine recent subspecies, though some recognise only two subspecies, mainland Asian tigers and the island tigers of the Sunda Islands.
Central to biology are five fundamental themes: the cell as the basic unit of life, genes and heredity as the basis of inheritance, evolution as the driver of biological diversity, energy transformation for sustaining life processes, and homeostasis,
It focuses on protecting computer software, systems, and networks from threats that can lead to unauthorized information disclosure, theft, or damage to hardware, software, or data, as well as to the disruption or misdirection of the services they pr
The Colosseum is an elliptical amphitheatre in the centre of the city of Rome, Italy, just east of the Roman Forum.
The wolf, also known as the grey wolf or gray wolf, is a canine native to Eurasia and North America.
The Amazon rainforest, also called the Amazon jungle, Amazonia, or simply the Amazon, is a moist broadleaf tropical rainforest in the Amazon biome that covers most of the Amazon basin of South America.
Population (album), by The Most Serene Republic, 2007
More than 100 peaks exceeding elevations of 7,200 metres above sea level lie in the Himalayas.
Catalysts are not consumed by the reaction and remain unchanged after the reaction.
It promotes universal access to a product's design or blueprint, and universal redistribution of that design or blueprint.
Lewis Morris was an American Founding Father, landowner, and developer from Morrisania, New York, presently part of Bronx County.
It is bordered by Poland to the north, Ukraine to the east, Hungary to the south, Austria to the west, and the Czech Republic to the northwest.
It is one of the most fundamental scientific disciplines.
Biology is the scientific study of life and living organisms.
Although her works on coal and viruses were appreciated in her lifetime, Franklin's contributions to the discovery of the structure of DNA were largely unrecognised during her life, for which Franklin has been variously referred to as the "wronged he
Kenya's capital and largest city is Nairobi.
Asia is the largest continent in the world by both land area and population.
Reproductive structures similar to the egg in other kingdoms are termed "spores", or in spermatophytes "seeds", or in gametophytes "egg cells".
A mixed-species feeding flock, also termed a mixed-species foraging flock, mixed hunting party or informally bird wave, is a flock of usually insectivorous birds of different species that join each other and move together while foraging.
It shares land borders with Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Yemen.
He was born in Pisa, then part of the Duchy of Florence.
Between 1884 and 1975, Western Sahara was known as Spanish Sahara, a Spanish colony.
Philosophy is a systematic study of general and fundamental questions concerning topics like existence, knowledge, mind, reason, language, and value.
Reptiles, as commonly defined, are tetrapod vertebrate animals with an ectothermic metabolism and amniotic development.
Symphonies are almost always scored for an orchestra consisting of a string section, brass, woodwind, and percussion instruments which altogether number about 30 to 100 musicians.
It corresponds roughly to the territory of modern Iraq.
At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860sqmi) and with a population of 10.6 million, Sweden is the largest and most populous Nordic country, and is the fifth-largest country in Europe.
Heavy metal is a genre of rock music that developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s, largely in the United Kingdom and United States.
The Black Death was a plague pandemic that occurred in Europe from 1346 to 1353.
Rabbits, or bunnies, are small mammals in the family Leporidae, which is in the order Lagomorpha.
Skylarking refers to the aerial displays including song made by various species of birds, such as Cassin's sparrow.
China, officially the People's Republic of China (PRC), is a country in East Asia.
Plato was an ancient Greek philosopher of Classical Athens who is most commonly considered the foundational thinker of the Western philosophical tradition.
He consolidated power and proclaimed himself dictator for life in 44 BC, helping create the political conditions that led to the collapse of the Roman Republic and the emergence of the Roman Empire.
Throughout recorded history and around the world, it has been an important part of many cultures' diets.
Turkey is home to over 86 million people; most are ethnic Turks, while Kurds are the largest ethnic minority.
Imperialism focuses on establishing or maintaining hegemony and a more formal empire.
Mesopotamia is a historical region of West Asia situated within the TigrisEuphrates river system, in the northern part of the Fertile Crescent.
An application programming interface (API) is a connection between computers or between computer programs.
Portugal, officially the Portuguese Republic, is a country in Southwestern Europe.
Within the vessel, an embryo is incubated until it has become an animal fetus that can survive on its own, at which point the animal hatches.
It has been a part of the official program of the Summer Olympic Games since Tokyo 1964.
Inside is a ring of smaller bluestones.
The United States of America (USA), also known as the United States (U.S.) or America, is a country primarily located in North America.
Pakistan, officially the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, is a country in South Asia.
Nuclear potential energy, the potential energy of the particles inside an atomic nucleus
Catalysis is the increase in rate of a chemical reaction due to an added substance known as a catalyst.
Guinea, officially the Republic of Guinea, is a coastal country located in West Africa.
Foxes are small-to-medium-sized omnivorous mammals belonging to several genera of the family Canidae.
He became deaf as a child and learned through books and tinkering.
Sauropsida is a clade of amniotes, broadly equivalent to the class Reptilia, though typically used in a broader sense to also include extinct stem-group relatives of modern non-avian reptiles and birds.
Computer vision tasks include methods for acquiring, processing, analyzing, and understanding digital images, and extraction of high-dimensional data from the real world in order to produce numerical or symbolic information, e.g.
The totality of fossils is known as the fossil record.
An atom consists of a nucleus of protons and generally neutrons, surrounded by an electromagnetically bound swarm of electrons.
The FIFA World Cup is an international association football competition among the senior men's national teams of the members of the Fdration Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), the sport's global governing body.
It covers an area of more than 44 million square kilometres, about 30% of Earth's total land area and 8% of Earth's total surface area.
A supernova is a powerful and luminous explosion of a star.
Pollution can take the form of any substance or energy.
One of its isotopes, 270Hs, has magic numbers of protons and neutrons for deformed nuclei, giving it greater stability against spontaneous fission.
Arkansas held a general election on November 3, 1936.
Its nine provinces are bounded to the south by 2,798 kilometres of coastline that stretches along the South Atlantic, and Indian Ocean; to the north by the neighbouring countries of Namibia, Botswana, and Zimbabwe
Fluorine is extremely reactive as it reacts with all other elements except for the light noble gases.
It is bordered by Namibia to the south, the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the north, Zambia to the east, and the Atlantic Ocean to the west.
Lee Won-ho is a South Korean sport shooter.
It is a staple food across the world, particularly in Europe and the Middle East.
It is used at room temperature as a spread, melted as a condiment, and used as a fat in baking, sauce-making, pan frying, and other cooking procedures.
The adjective "deep" refers to the use of multiple layers in the network.
It is the seventh-largest country by area, the most populous country in the world and, since its independence in 1947, the world's most populous democracy.
Yerevan is the capital, largest city and financial center.
1916 Nova Scotia general election, the 35th overall general election for Nova Scotia, for the 36th Legislative Assembly of Nova Scotia, but considered the 13th general election for the Canadian province of Nova Scotia
Switzerland, officially the Swiss Confederation, is a landlocked country located at the intersection of Central, Western, and Southern Europe.
Saturn is the sixth planet from the Sun and the second largest in the Solar System, after Jupiter.
Such effects occur in the context of formation and evolution of galaxies, gravitational lensing, the observable universe's current structure, mass position in galactic collisions, the motion of galaxies within galaxy clusters, and cosmic microwave ba
Botswana is topographically flat, with approximately 70% of its territory being a part of the Kalahari Desert.
With a population of over 140 million, Russia is the most populous country in Europe and the ninth-most populous in the world.
For example, a large-scale quantum computer could break some widely used encryption schemes and aid physicists in performing physical simulations.
It occupies the Qatar Peninsula on the northeastern coast of the Arabian Peninsula in the Middle East; it shares its sole land border with Saudi Arabia to the south, with the rest of its territory surrounded by the Persian Gulf.
The Silk Road was a network of Asian trade routes active from the second centuryBCE until the mid-15th century.
Muhammad was an Arab religious, military, and political leader, and the founder of Islam.
Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela was a South African anti-apartheid activist, statesman, and revolutionary who was the first president of South Africa from 1994 to 1999.
Denmark is a Nordic country in Northern Europe.
Smartphones have built-in cameras, GPS navigation, and support for various communication methods, including voice calls, text messaging, and internet-based messaging apps.
The Islamic Wilayat of Somalia, also called the Islamic Emirate of Somalia, is an unrecognized state under the control and governance of al-Shabaab, which declared its territory as a collection of Islamic provinces in 2008.
Belgium, officially the Kingdom of Belgium, is a country in Northwestern Europe.
They are very widely distributed and are found on all continents, except Antarctica.
It is the northernmost country in Latin America and borders the United States of America to the north, and Guatemala and Belize to the southeast; while having maritime boundaries with the Pacific Ocean to the west, the Caribbean Sea to the southeast,
Canada is a country in North America.
France, officially the French Republic, is a country primarily located in Western Europe.
Napoleon Bonaparte, later known by his regnal name NapoleonI, was Emperor of the French from 18 May 1804 until his first abdication in 1814, with a brief restoration during the Hundred Days in 1815.
The atmosphere is composed mostly of carbon dioxide and has a thick cloud layer of sulfuric acid that spans the whole planet.
It began as a rebellion and turned into a revolution eventually creating the sovereign United States, which was the outcome of the associated American Revolutionary War (1775-1783).
Iceland is a Nordic island country between the Arctic Ocean and the North Atlantic Ocean, located on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge between Europe and North America.
Modern geology significantly overlaps all other Earth sciences, including hydrology.
It is an economic phenomenon and its history resides in economic history.
Spanning the majority of the Iberian Peninsula, its territory also includes the Canary Islands, in the Eastern Atlantic Ocean; the Balearic Islands, in the Western Mediterranean Sea; and the autonomous cities of Ceuta and Melilla, in mainland Africa.
A fossil is any preserved remains, impression, or trace of any once-living thing from a past geological age.
Einstein also made important contributions to quantum theory.
Eswatini, formally the Kingdom of Eswatini, also known by its former official names Swaziland and the Kingdom of Swaziland, is a landlocked country in Southern Africa.
It consists of two archipelagos around the two main islands of So Tom and Prncipe, about 81 nautical miles apart and about 135 and 121 nautical miles off the northwestern coast of Gabon.
The predominant religion of the populationand the official state religionis Islam.
Urbanization is the process by which human settlements are formed and become larger as more people live, recreate and work in cities and towns.
It is widely believed that a quantum computer could perform some calculations exponentially faster than any classical computer.
Israel, officially the State of Israel, is a country in the Southern Levant region of West Asia.
It spans an area of about 181,035km2 (69,898sqmi), dominated by a low-lying plain and the confluence of the Mekong river and Tonl Sap, Southeast Asia's largest lake.
The chloroplast genome, and therefore the maternal line, is that of pomelo.
He is often called England's national poet and the "Bard of Avon" or simply "the Bard".
Metropolitan Denmark, also called "continental Denmark" or "Denmark proper", consists of the northern Jutland peninsula and an archipelago of 406 islands.
Its territory comprises a main island, over 60 satellite islands and islets, and one outlying islet.
It is found in North America, including Alabama, Illinois, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Ontario, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and Wisconsin.
Tuberculosis initially infects the lungs, but it can also spread to other parts of the body.
It consists of a peninsula that extends into the Mediterranean Sea, with the Alps on its northern land border, as well as nearly 800 islands, notably Sicily and Sardinia.
A scientist who specializes in the field of physics is called a physicist.
From the late 13th century onward, the complex was gradually transformed into a Buddhist temple and has remained an active center of Buddhist worship for centuries.
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly known as the United Kingdom (UK) or Britain, is a country in northwestern Europe, off the coast of the continental mainland.
Metropolitan France shares borders with Belgium and Luxembourg to the north, Germany to the northeast, Switzerland to the east, Italy and Monaco to the southeast, Andorra and Spain to the south, and a maritime border with the United Kingdom to the no
Examples include bones, shells, exoskeletons, stone imprints of animals or microbes, objects preserved in amber, hair, petrified wood and DNA remnants.
It constitutes the southern half of the Korean Peninsula and borders North Korea along the Korean Demilitarized Zone, with the Yellow Sea to the west and the Sea of Japan to the east.
Tofu  or bean curd is a food prepared by pressing the curds of coagulated soy milk into solid white blocks of varying softness: 'silken', 'soft', 'firm', and 'extra firm'.
It is the lightest halogen and exists at standard conditions as pale yellow diatomic gas.
It has a land area of 7,688,287km2 (2,968,464sqmi), making it the sixth-largest country in the world, and is the world's flattest and driest inhabited continent.
It can be attributed to a series of factors, including the reduction of barriers to international trade, the liberalization of capital movements, the development of transportation infrastructure, and the advancement of information and communication t
It is the main source of energy for life on Earth.
Many curries are found in the cuisines of countries in Southeast Asia and East Asia.
Flames from hydrocarbon fuels consist primarily of carbon dioxide, water vapor, oxygen, and nitrogen.
Vietnam, officially the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam (SRV), is a country at the eastern edge of Mainland Southeast Asia.
The first laser was built in 1960 by Theodore Maiman at Hughes Research Laboratories, based on theoretical work by Charles H.
Its closest living relatives are the wombats.
The American Revolution (17651789) was a political movement in the Thirteen Colonies of Great Britain.
The filling of the burger can be topped with condiments such as ketchup, mustard, mayonnaise, relish, or a "special sauce", often a variation of Thousand Island dressing.
If the reaction is rapid and the catalyst is recycled quickly, a very small amount of catalyst often suffices; mixing, surface area, and temperature are important factors in reaction rate.
Thailand, officially the Kingdom of Thailand, and formerly known as Siam, is a country located in Mainland Southeast Asia.
In a joint presentation with Alfred Russel Wallace, he introduced his scientific theory that this branching pattern of evolution resulted from a process he called natural selection, in which the struggle for existence has a similar effect to the arti
Food colouring is sometimes added in addition to stabilizers.
Spain, officially the Kingdom of Spain, is a country in Southern and Western Europe with territories in North Africa.
So Tom and Prncipe, officially the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, is an island country in the Gulf of Guinea, off the western equatorial coast of Central Africa.
Chad has a population of 19million, of which 1.6million live in the capital and largest city of N'Djamena.
Mosquitoes, the Culicidae, are a family of small flies consisting of 3,600 species.
It has an area of 28,000 square kilometres (11,000sqmi).
Copper is a chemical element; it has symbol Cu and atomic number 29.
He was highly influential in the development of theoretical computer science, providing a formalisation of the concepts of algorithm and computation with the Turing machine, which can be considered a model of a general-purpose computer.
The study of the traditional reptile orders, customarily in combination with the study of modern amphibians, is called herpetology.
She is a violinist and lead singer in folk-rock band Garmarna, which she joined in 1993 for their first album, and also lead singer for the folk band Triakel.
The smallest bat, and one of the smallest extant mammals, is Kitti's hog-nosed bat, which is 2933mm (1.11.3in) in length, 150mm (5.9in) across the forearm and 2g (0.071oz) in mass.
He competed in the men's 10 metre air pistol event at the 2024 Summer Olympics.
Ukraine is a country in Eastern Europe.
Despite its goal, encryption does not itself prevent interference but denies the intelligible content to a would-be interceptor.
It was described by Wilhelm Ferdinand Erichson in 1847.
This region includes territory belonging to nine nations and 3,344 indigenous territories.
Sushi  is a traditional Japanese dish made with vinegared rice , typically seasoned with sugar and salt, and combined with a variety of ingredients , such as seafood, vegetables, or meat; raw seafood is the most common, although some may be cooked.
is a Japanese light novel series written by Haka Tokura and illustrated by Eiri Shirai.
She represented Armenia in the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2014 in Malta with her song "People of the Sun".
It can be seen as the precursor for other revolutions that occurred in the aftermath of World War I, such as the German Revolution of 19181919.
She was the first to recognise the machine had applications beyond pure calculation.
Ben Kruger was a South African actor and author, best known for his roles in the popular serials Snake Island, Binnelanders and Zero Tolerance.
It is a unitary republic comprising mainland Portugal, located on the southwestern portion of the Iberian Peninsula and bordered by Spain to the north and east, and the archipelagos of Madeira and the Azores in the Atlantic Ocean.
As with all single-reed instruments, sound is produced when a reed on a mouthpiece vibrates to produce a sound wave inside the instrument's body.
Flames, the most visible portion of the fire, are produced in the combustion reaction when the fuel reaches its ignition point temperature.
Stellar population, categorized groups of stars within the Milky Way
Each player uses a tennis racket strung with a cord to strike a hollow rubber ball covered with felt over or around a net and into the opponent's court.
Its ten provinces and three territories extend from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific Ocean and northward into the Arctic Ocean, making it the second-largest country by total area, with the longest coastline of any country.
He is believed by Muslims to be the Seal of the Prophets, and along with the Quran, his teachings and normative examples form the basis for Islamic religious belief.
It is divided into 33 province-level divisions, including two special administrative regions.
It cuts across the narrowest point of the Isthmus of Panama, and is a conduit for maritime trade between the Atlantic Ocean and the Pacific Ocean.
Though a similar heliocentric model had been developed eighteen centuries earlier by Aristarchus of Samos, an ancient Greek astronomer, Copernicus likely arrived at his model independently.
The 48 contiguous states border Canada to the north and Mexico to the south, with the semi-exclave of Alaska in the northwest and the archipelago of Hawaii in the Pacific Ocean.
They are familiar throughout the world as a small herbivore, a prey animal, a domesticated form of livestock, and a pet, having a widespread effect on ecologies and cultures.
Python supports multiple programming paradigms but with an emphasis on object-oriented programming and dynamic typing.
Reggae is a music genre that originated in Jamaica in the late 1960s.
Punk rock is a genre of music that emerged in the mid-1970s.
Proteins are large biomolecules and macromolecules that comprise one or more long chains of amino acid residues.
Niagara Falls is a group of three waterfalls at the southern end of Niagara Gorge, spanning the border between the Canadian province of Ontario and the U.S.
It can be done in a variety of processes in which material is deposited, joined or solidified under computer control, with the material being added together, typically layer by layer.
Chile, officially the Republic of Chile, is a country in western South America.
According to the 2024 census, Chile had an enumerated population of 18.5 million.
Situated in the geographical region of Oceania, more specifically in the subregion of Australasia, Australia is the smallest of the seven traditional continents.
The Fall of Constantinople, also known as the Conquest of Constantinople, was the capture of Constantinople, the capital city of the Byzantine Empire, by the Ottoman Empire.
Situated on the Balkan Peninsula, it borders Serbia to the east, Montenegro to the southeast, and Croatia to the north and southwest, with a 20-kilometre-long (12-mile) coast on the Adriatic Sea in the south.
Israel's western coast lies on the Mediterranean Sea, its southern tip reaches the Red Sea, and to the east is Earth's lowest point near the Dead Sea.
The Japanese archipelago consists of four major islands alongside 14,121 smaller islands.
Nicolaus Copernicus was a Renaissance polymath who formulated a model of the universe that placed the Sun rather than Earth at its center.
The Crusades were a series of military campaigns launched by the papacy between 1095 and 1291 against Muslim rulers for the recovery and defence of the Holy Land, as part of a wider crusading movement.
Pop music, or simply pop, is a genre of popular music that originated in its modern form during the mid-1950s in the United States and the United Kingdom.
The Great Wall of China is a series of fortifications in China.
Colombia's mainland is bordered by the Caribbean Sea to the north, Venezuela to the east, Brazil to the southeast, Peru and Ecuador to the south and southwest, the Pacific Ocean to the west, and Panama to the northwest.
The term also refers to the modern popular music of Jamaica and its diaspora.
It is sometimes referred to as Guinea-Conakry, after its capital Conakry, to distinguish it from other territories in the eponymous region, such as Guinea-Bissau and Equatorial Guinea.
A vaccine typically contains an agent that resembles a disease-causing microorganism and is often made from weakened or killed forms of the microbe, its toxins, or one of its surface proteins.
The primary functions which distinguish money are: medium of exchange, a unit of account, a store of value and sometimes, a standard of deferred payment.
A continent is any of several large terrestrial geographical regions.
Coffee is a beverage brewed from roasted ground coffee beans.
The Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR), also known as the Sahrawi Republic and Western Sahara, is a partially recognised state in the western Maghreb, which claims the non-self-governing territory of Western Sahara, but controls only the eastern
The range has some of the Earth's highest peaks, including the highest, Mount Everest.
The British Empire comprised the dominions, colonies, protectorates, mandates, and other territories ruled or administered by the United Kingdom and its predecessor states.
An optical fiber, or optical fibre, is a flexible glass or plastic fiber that can transmit light from one end to the other.
Though sensitivity to sound varies among all organisms, the human ear is sensitive to audio frequencies ranging from 20 Hz to 20kHz.
It has been variously described as a science and as the art of justice.
Together with ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, it was one of the three early civilisations of the Near East and South Asia.
Three of the most common types of decay are alpha, beta, and gamma decay.
It has a pale yellowish to dark golden fur with dark spots grouped in rosettes.
It borders the Atlantic Ocean to the west, Guinea-Bissau to the northwest, Senegal to the north, Mali to the northeast, Ivory Coast to the southeast, and Sierra Leone and Liberia to the south.
Such fibers are widely used in fiber-optic communication, where they permit transmission over longer distances and at higher bandwidths than electrical cables.
The tree originated in Central Asia, where its wild ancestor, Malus sieversii, is still found.
Camels are working animals especially suited to their desert habitat and are a vital means of transport for passengers and cargo.
The physical principles of acoustic waves apply to any frequency range, including ultrasound.
Bioenergy and geothermal power are also significant in some countries.
It is bordered by Belgium to the west and north, Germany to the east, and France to the south and west.
Male deer of almost all species, as well as female reindeer, grow and shed new antlers each year.
Much of the shared cultural heritage of the Sinosphere originates in the philosophy and teachings of Confucius.
It is bordered by the Red Sea to the west; Jordan, Iraq, and Kuwait to the north; the Arabian Gulf, Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates to the east; Oman to the southeast; and Yemen to the south.
Sterke verhalen is a 2010 Dutch independent teen comedy written and directed by Kees van Nieuwkerk and Teddy Cherim and it stars Achmed Akkabi, Sallie Harmsen, Manuel Broekman, Gza Weisz, Gwen Pol and Isis Cabolet.
"Understanding" in this context signifies the transformation of visual images into descriptions of the world that make sense to thought processes and can elicit appropriate action.
It is the fifth-most populous country, with a population of over 241.5 million, having the second-largest Muslim population as of 2023.
It emerged from prehistoric Egypt around 3150BC, when Upper and Lower Egypt were united by Menes, who is believed by the majority of Egyptologists to have been the same person as Narmer.
Thermodynamics applies to various topics in science and engineering, especially physical chemistry, biochemistry, chemical engineering, and mechanical engineering, as well as other complex fields such as meteorology.
She shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics with her husband, Pierre Curie, "for their joint researches on the radioactivity phenomena discovered by Professor Henri Becquerel".
The Netherlands consists of twelve provinces and three overseas special municipalities.
Jellyfish are mainly free-swimming marine animals, although a few are anchored to the seabed by stalks rather than being motile.
Atoms are the basic particles of the chemical elements and the fundamental building blocks of matter.
A laser is a device that emits light through a process of optical amplification based on the stimulated emission of electromagnetic radiation.
Hakea hastata is a shrub in the family Proteaceae and is endemic to southern Western Australia.
Elephants are the largest living land animals.
Bouvet Island, located in the Subantarctic, is a dependency, and not a part of the Kingdom; Norway also claims the Antarctic territories of Peter I Island and Queen Maud Land.
Chemistry is the scientific study of the properties and behavior of matter.
Wi-Fi is a family of wireless network protocols based on the IEEE 802.11 family of standards, which are commonly used for local area networking of devices and Internet access, allowing nearby digital devices to exchange data by radio waves.
It has a powerful, muscular body with a large head and paws, a long tail and orange fur with black, mostly vertical stripes.
The Roman Republic had previously conquered most of these territories, which later came under permanent single-person rule following Octavian's rise to power and the establishment of the Augustan Principate in 27 BC.
Volleyball is a team sport in which two teams of six players are separated by a net.
According to Buddhist legends, he was born in Lumbini, in what is now Nepal, to royal parents of the Shakya clan, but renounced his home life to live as a wandering ascetic.
Mathematics is used to model and solve problems in science, engineering, technology, economics, and everyday life.
Angola, officially the Republic of Angola, is a country on the western coast of Southern Africa.
Zebras are African equines with distinctive black-and-white striped coats.
Most infections show no symptoms, in which case it is known as inactive or latent tuberculosis.
The murders were committed primarily through mass shootings across Eastern Europe and poison gas chambers in extermination camps, chiefly Auschwitz-Birkenau, Treblinka, Belzec, Sobibor, Chemno and Majdanek death camps in occupied Poland.
The Grand Canyon is 277 miles (446km) long, up to 18 miles (29km) wide and attains a depth of over a mile.
Ashgabat is the capital and largest city.
It is the world's second-most populous country after India, with a population exceeding 1.4 billion, across an area of 9.6million square kilometers (3,700,000sqmi), making it the third-largest country by area.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is the capability of computational systems to perform tasks typically associated with human intelligence, such as learning, reasoning, problem-solving, perception, and decision-making.
It is bordered by Pakistan to the east and south, Iran to the west, Turkmenistan to the northwest, Uzbekistan to the north, Tajikistan to the northeast, and China to the northeast and east.
Bounded by the Indian Ocean on the south, the Arabian Sea on the southwest, and the Bay of Bengal on the southeast, it shares land borders with Pakistan to the west; China, Nepal and Bhutan to the north; Bangladesh and Myanmar to the east.
Australia, officially the Commonwealth of Australia, is a country comprising the mainland of the Australian continent, the island of Tasmania and numerous smaller islands.
Chad, officially the Republic of Chad, is a country in Central Africa.
The Indus Valley Civilisation (IVC), also known as the Indus Civilisation, was a Bronze Age civilisation in the northwestern regions of South Asia, lasting from 3300BCE to 1300BCE, and in its mature form from 2600BCE to 1900BCE.
Stonehenge is a prehistoric megalithic structure on Salisbury Plain in Wiltshire, England, two miles (3km) west of Amesbury.
Gregor Mendel, a Moravian Augustinian friar working in the 19th century in Brno, was the first to study genetics scientifically.
They are thus citizens of the European Union (EU), although Greenland is not part of the EU.
It is bordered by Myanmar and China to the northwest, Vietnam to the east, Cambodia to the southeast, and Thailand to the west and southwest.
A member of the First Triumvirate, he led the Roman armies through the Gallic Wars and defeated his political rival Pompey in Caesar's civil war.
Electronic music broadly is a group of music genres that employ electronic musical instruments, circuitry-based music technology and software, or general-purpose electronics in its creation.
Renewable energy is energy made from renewable natural resources that are replenished on a human timescale.
Also called the domestic dog, it was selectively bred during the Late Pleistocene by hunter-gatherers.
It is an important branch in biology because heredity is vital to organisms' evolution.
A continent could be a single large landmass, a landmass and nearby islands either on or beyond its continental shelf, or a part of a larger landmass, as in the case of Asia and Europe within Eurasia.
Maria Salomea Skodowska Curie, better known as Marie Curie, was a Polish and naturalised-French physicist and chemist.
Neuroscience is the scientific study of the nervous system, its functions, and its disorders.
With an area of almost 1.8millionkm2 (700,000sqmi), Libya is the fourth-largest country in Africa and the Arab world, and the 16th-largest in the world.
Its capital and largest city is Dublin, on the eastern side of the island, with a population of over 1.5million.
Armenia, officially the Republic of Armenia, is a landlocked country in the Armenian highlands of West Asia.
Ancient Greece was a northeastern Mediterranean civilization, existing from the Greek Dark Ages of the 12th9th centuriesBC to the end of classical antiquity, comprising a loose collection of culturally and linguistically related city-states and commu
Oman's coastline faces the Arabian Sea to the southeast and the Gulf of Oman on the northeast.
It is highly radioactive: its most stable known isotopes have half-lives of about ten seconds.
The sausage used is a wiener or a frankfurter.
South Africa, officially the Republic of South Africa (RSA), is the southernmost country in Africa.
Natural language processing (NLP) is the processing of natural language information by a computer.
A smartphone is a mobile device that combines the functionality of a traditional mobile phone with advanced computing capabilities.
A rhinoceros, commonly abbreviated to rhino, is a member of any of the five extant species of odd-toed ungulates (perissodactyls) in the family Rhinocerotidae.
With an area of 28,748km2 (11,100sqmi), it has a varied range of climatic, geological, hydrological and morphological conditions.
Neither side stood by their commitments, and the charter was annulled by Pope Innocent III, leading to the First Barons' War.
The World Wide Web is a global interconnected information system that enables content sharing over the Internet.
It is the fifth element in group 2 and is a soft, silvery alkaline earth metal.
Its capital and most populous city, Luxembourg City, is one of the four institutional seats of the European Union and hosts several EU institutions, notably the Court of Justice of the European Union, the highest judicial authority in the EU.
Mercury most commonly refers to:Mercury (planet), the closest planet to the Sun
Curry is a dish with a spicy sauce, initially in Indian cuisine, then modified by interchange with the Portuguese, followed by the British, and eventually thoroughly internationalised.
As a statesman, he implemented numerous legal and administrative reforms in France and Europe.
The most popular definition states that Sauropsida is the sibling taxon to Synapsida, the other clade of amniotes which includes mammals as its only modern representatives.
Although early synapsids have historically been referred to as "mammal-like reptiles", all synapsids are more closely related to mammals than to any modern reptile.
He is widely regarded as the greatest writer in the English language and the world's pre-eminent dramatist.
The Gulf of Aqaba in the northeast separates Egypt from Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
It is the only living family in the superfamily Rhinocerotoidea.
Wildlife population, group of non-human individuals
By the late 3rd century AD, the empire had been divided many times.
It is known for its ballads and dance tunes, identifiable by both traditional lyrics and harmonies accompanied by banjos, mandolins, fiddles, harmonicas, and many types of guitar; either acoustic, electric, steel, or resonator guitars.
The Republic of the Congo, also known as Congo-Brazzaville, the Congo Republic or simply Congo, is a country located on the western coast of Central Africa to the west of the Congo River.
A choir, also known as a chorale or chorus, is a musical ensemble of singers.
Hip-hop is a genre of popular music that emerged in the early 1970s alongside an associated subculture created by African-American and Afro-Caribbean communities in New York City.
The species is endemic to Australia.
Its maritime boundaries include the Gulf of Thailand and the Andaman Sea and shares maritime borders with Vietnam, Indonesia, and India.
An apple is the round, edible fruit of an apple tree.
Dark matter is implied by gravitational effects that cannot be explained by general relativity unless more matter is present than can be observed.
It typically has a touchscreen interface, allowing users to access a wide range of applications and services, such as web browsing, email, and social media, as well as multimedia playback and streaming.
The following lists events that happened during 2014 in Zambia.
Rats are various medium-sized, long-tailed rodents.
Hawks are birds of prey of the family Accipitridae.
It shares land borders with Myanmar to the west and northwest, Laos to the east and northeast, Cambodia to the southeast, and Malaysia to the south.
Galileo has been called the father of observational astronomy, classical physics, the scientific method, and modern science.
He advanced civil rights for people of color in the United States through the use of nonviolent resistance and civil disobedience against Jim Crow laws and other forms of legalized discrimination, which most commonly affected African Americans.
Blood transfusion is the process of transferring blood products into a person's circulation intravenously.
They are found in both embryonic and adult organisms, but they have slightly different properties in each.
India, officially the Republic of India, is a country in South Asia.
It is bordered to the west by Gabon, to the northwest by Cameroon, to the northeast by the Central African Republic, to the southeast by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to the south by the Angolan exclave of Cabinda, and to the southwest by the
It was one of the most fatal pandemics in human history, leading to the death of up to 50 million people, or 50% of Europe's 14th-century population.
It is bordered by Libya to the north, Sudan to the east, the Central African Republic to the south, Cameroon to the southwest, Nigeria to the southwest, and Niger to the west.
The Cold War was a period of international geopolitical rivalry between the United States (US) and the Soviet Union (USSR) and their respective allies, the capitalist Western Bloc and communist Eastern Bloc.
Ancient Egypt was a cradle of civilization concentrated along the lower reaches of the Nile River in the eastern part of North Africa.
It is variously defined as covering the 15th and 16th centuries or, more broadly, as lasting from the 14th century to the 17th.
The actinide series, a set of 15 elements between actinium and lawrencium in the periodic table, is named after actinium.
State-enforced laws can be made by a legislature, resulting in statutes; by the executive through decrees and regulations; or by judges' decisions, which form precedent in common law jurisdictions.
Linux was originally designed as a clone of Unix and is distributed under the copyleft GPL license.
The Taj Mahal is an ivory-white marble mausoleum on the right bank of the river Yamuna in Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India.
Modern digital electronic computers can perform generic sets of operations known as programs, which enable computers to perform a wide range of tasks.
Botanically, this is the hybrid Citrus  sinensis, between the pomelo and the mandarin orange.
An innovator of the literary dialogue and dialectic forms, Plato influenced all the major areas of theoretical philosophy and practical philosophy, and was the founder of the Academy, a philosophical school in Athens where Plato taught the collection
Magical Buffs: The Support Caster Is Stronger Than He Realized!
Money is any item or verifiable record that is generally accepted as payment for goods and services and repayment of debts, such as taxes, in a particular country or socio-economic context.
He succeeded his father Philip II to the throne in 336 BC at the age of 20, and spent most of his reign conducting a lengthy military campaign throughout Asia and Egypt.
The word "crow" is used as part of the common name of many species.
Charles Robert Darwin was an English naturalist, geologist, and biologist, widely known for his contributions to evolutionary biology.
It is recognised by 38 UN member states and South Ossetia.
Originally designed by Google, the project is now maintained by a worldwide community of contributors, and the trademark is held by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation.
It uses logical reasoning and proof to study and establish their properties, often expressed as theorems, formulas, and equations.
The variety and impact of his work made Kepler one of the founders and fathers of modern astronomy, the scientific method, natural science, and modern science.
Kubernetes, also known as K8s, is an open-source container orchestration system for automating software deployment, scaling, and management.
Located in the Pacific Ocean off the northeast coast of the Asian mainland, it is bordered to the west by the Sea of Japan and extends from the Sea of Okhotsk in the north to the East China Sea in the south.
Her first language was Koine Greek, and she is the only Ptolemaic ruler known to have learned the Egyptian language, among several others.
Thomas Alva Edison was an American inventor and businessman.
Uzbekistan, officially the Republic of Uzbekistan, is a doubly landlocked country located in Central Asia.
A computer is a machine that can be programmed to automatically carry out sequences of arithmetic or logical operations (computation).
A quantum computer is a real or theoretical computer that exploits quantum phenomena like superposition and entanglement in an essential way.
A member of the Ptolemaic dynasty, she was a descendant of its founder Ptolemy I Soter, a Macedonian Greek general and companion of Alexander the Great.
A supernova occurs during the last evolutionary stages of a massive star, or when a white dwarf is triggered into runaway nuclear fusion.
Cake is a baker's confectionery made by combining flour with a liquid, a fat or both, and usually with a leavening agent.
The 1968 single by Toots and the Maytals titled "Do the Reggay" was the first popular song to use the word reggae, effectively naming the genre and introducing it to a global audience.
A document or standard that describes how to build such a connection or interface is called an API specification.
Californium is a synthetic chemical element; it has symbol Cf and atomic number 98.
Its capital and largest city is Reykjavk, which is home to about 35% of the country's roughly 395,000 residents.
Art is a diverse range of cultural activity centered around works utilizing creative or imaginative talents, which are expected to evoke a worthwhile experience, generally through an expression of emotional power, conceptual ideas, technical proficie
Indonesia, officially the Republic of Indonesia, is a country in Southeast Asia and Oceania, between the Indian and Pacific oceans.
Choirs may perform music from the classical music repertoire, which spans from the medieval era to the present, or popular music repertoire.
The country has an area of 23,200km2 (8,958sqmi).
The Mongol Empire was the largest contiguous empire in history.
The Renaissance was a European period of history and cultural movement taking place at the end of the Late Middle Ages and the beginning of the early modern era.
The Monument to lvaro de Bazn is an instance of public art in Madrid, Spain.
It is a soft, malleable, and ductile metal with very high thermal and electrical conductivity.
The mixture is cooled below the freezing point of water and stirred to incorporate air spaces and prevent detectable ice crystals from forming.
Confucius, born Kong Qiu, was a Chinese philosopher of the Spring and Autumn period who is traditionally considered the paragon of Chinese sages.
Bismuth is a chemical element; it has symbol Bi and atomic number 83.
A pandemic is an epidemic of an infectious disease that has a sudden increase in cases and spreads across a large region, for instance multiple continents or worldwide, affecting a substantial portion of the human population.
Bitcoin is the first decentralized cryptocurrency.
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was a Classical composer and musician.
It is bordered by Germany to the north, France to the west, Austria and Liechtenstein to the east, and Italy to the south.
Rather than annexation, this typically culminates in organizing the colonized into colonies separate to the colonizers' metropole.
These patties are often served with lettuce, tomato, onion, pickles, bacon, or chilis, together in the bun or roll.
Once called hillbilly music, the term country music was popularized in the 1940s.
NLP is also related to information retrieval, knowledge representation, computational linguistics, and linguistics more broadly.
Italy, officially the Italian Republic, is a country in Southern and Western Europe.
Egypt, officially the Arab Republic of Egypt, is a country spanning the northeast corner of Africa and southwest corner of Asia via the Sinai Peninsula.
South Korea claims to be the sole legitimate government of the entire peninsula and adjacent islands.
A camel is an even-toed ungulate in the genus Camelus that bears distinctive fatty deposits known as "humps" on its back.
Honey is a sweet and viscous substance made by several species of bees, the best-known of which are honey bees.
It facilitates access to documents and other web resources according to specific rules of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP).
It is the main constituent of Earth's streams, lakes, and oceans.
According to The Oxford Companion to Food, soup is the main generic term for liquid savoury dishes; others include broth, bisque, consomm, potage and many more.
A symphony is an extended musical composition in Western classical music, most often for orchestra.
The sovereign state is separated from the Comoros, Mayotte, and Madagascar through the Mozambique Channel to the east.
Germany, officially the Federal Republic of Germany, is a country in Western and Central Europe.
Python is a high-level, general-purpose programming language that emphasizes code readability, simplicity, and ease-of-writing with the use of significant indentation, an extensive ("batteries-included") standard library, and garbage collection.
North America is a continent in the Northern and Western hemispheres.
It borders Iraq to the west, Turkey, Azerbaijan, and Armenia to the northwest, the Caspian Sea to the north, Turkmenistan to the northeast, Afghanistan to the east, Pakistan to the southeast, and the Gulf of Oman and the Persian Gulf to the south.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, often referred to as Bosnia-Herzegovina or simply Bosnia, is a country in Southeast Europe.
The tiger is a large cat and a member of the genus Panthera native to Asia.
It is the metropole and most populous constituent of the Kingdom of Denmark, also known as the Danish Realm, a constitutionally unitary state that includes the autonomous territories of the Faroe Islands and Greenland in the north Atlantic Ocean.
A virus is a submicroscopic infectious agent that replicates only inside the living cells of an organism.
With a population of 201,800, So Tom and Prncipe is the second-smallest and second-least populous African sovereign state after Seychelles.
Bees produce honey by gathering and then refining the sugary secretions of plants or the secretions of other insects, like the honeydew of aphids.
The country has a population of over 11.4 million, and Lisbon, its capital, is the largest city.
There are typically four main sections of instruments:The string section, including the violin, viola, cello, and double bass
Equatorial Guinea, officially the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, is a country on the west coast of Central Africa and the only Spanish-speaking country in Africa.
CRISPR is a family of DNA sequences found in the genomes of prokaryotic organisms such as bacteria and archaea.
It is the first element in group 6.
Opera is a form of Western theatre in which music is a fundamental component and dramatic roles are taken by singers.
Covering an area of 1,221,037 square kilometres, the country has a population of over 63 million people, making it the sixth-most populated country in Africa.
It occurs when evolutionary processes such as genetic drift and natural selection act on genetic variation, resulting in certain characteristics becoming more or less common within a population over successive generations.
Colombia is divided into 32 departments.
Use of bitcoin as a currency began in 2009, with the release of its open-source implementation.
Its capital and largest city is Moroni.
It is the first space station built, maintained and crewed through international cooperation and the largest human spacecraft ever constructed.
There are also various coffee substitutes.
Docker automates the deployment of applications within lightweight containers, enabling them to run consistently across different computing environments.
Quantum mechanics, also known as quantum physics, is the fundamental physical theory that describes the behavior of matter and of light; its unusual characteristics typically occur at and below the scale of atoms.
Its concepts and methods have been applied across many disciplines, including quantum chemistry, quantum biology, quantum field theory, quantum technology, and quantum information science.
Relativity may refer to:
In physics, electromagnetism is an interaction that occurs between particles with electric charge via electromagnetic fields.
The electromagnetic force is one of the four fundamental forces of nature.
It is the dominant force in the interactions of atoms and molecules.
Electromagnetism describes and relates the three distinct but closely intertwined phenomena of electricity, magnetism, and optics.
Nuclear physics is the field of physics that studies atomic nuclei and their constituents and interactions, in addition to the study of other forms of nuclear matter.
Particle physics or high-energy physics is the study of fundamental particles and forces that constitute matter and radiation.
The field also studies combinations of elementary particles up to the scale of protons and neutrons, while the study of combinations of protons and neutrons is called nuclear physics.
Astrophysics is a science that applies the methods and principles of physics and chemistry in the study of astronomical objects and phenomena including the universe.
As one of the founders of the discipline, James Keeler, said, astrophysics "seeks to ascertain the nature of the heavenly bodies, rather than their positions or motions in spacewhat they are, rather than where they are", which is studied in celestial
Astrophysics is also used when designing and plotting courses for Spacecraft.
Cosmology is the study of the nature of the universe, the cosmos.
The term cosmology was first used in English in 1656 in Thomas Blount's Glossographia, with the meaning of "a speaking of the world".
In 1731, German philosopher Christian Wolff used the term cosmology in Latin (cosmologia) to denote a branch of metaphysics that deals with the general nature of the physical world.
Cosmology is investigated by scientists, including astronomers and physicists, as well as philosophers, such as metaphysicians, philosophers of physics, and philosophers of space and time.
In physics, string theory is a theoretical framework in which the point-like particles of particle physics are replaced by one-dimensional objects called strings.
String theory describes how these strings move through space and interact with each other by vibrations.
On distance scales larger than the string scale, a string acts like a particle, with its mass, charge, and other properties determined by the vibrational state of the string.
In string theory, one of the many vibrational states of the string corresponds to the graviton, a quantum mechanical particle that carries the gravitational force.
Dark matter is thought to serve as gravitational scaffolding for cosmic structures.
In physical cosmology and astronomy, dark energy is a proposed form of energy that affects the universe on its largest scales.
Its primary effect is to drive the accelerating expansion of the universe.
It also slows the rate of structure formation.
Assuming that the lambda-CDM model of cosmology is correct, dark energy dominates the universe, contributing 68% of the total mass-energy in the present-day observable universe while dark matter and ordinary (baryonic) matter contribute 27% and 5%, r
The Higgs boson, sometimes called the Higgs particle, is an elementary particle in the Standard Model of particle physics produced by the quantum excitation of the Higgs field, one of the fields in particle physics theory.
In the Standard Model, the Higgs particle is a massive scalar boson that couples to particles whose mass arises from their interactions with the Higgs field, has zero spin, even (positive) parity, no electric charge, and no color charge.
It is also very unstable, decaying into other particles almost immediately upon generation.
Superconductivity is a set of physical properties observed in superconductors: materials where electrical resistance is exactly zero and magnetic fields are expelled from the material.
Unlike an ordinary metallic conductor, whose resistance decreases gradually as its temperature is lowered, even down to near absolute zero, a superconductor has a characteristic critical temperature below which the resistance drops abruptly to zero.
An electric current through a loop of superconducting wire can persist indefinitely with no power source.
Quantum entanglement is the phenomenon in which the quantum state of each particle in a group cannot be described independently of the state of the others, even when the particles are separated by a large distance.
The topic of quantum entanglement is at the heart of the disparity between classical physics and quantum physics: entanglement is a primary feature of quantum mechanics not present in classical mechanics.
In quantum mechanics, a wave function is a mathematical description of the quantum state of an isolated quantum system.
The most common symbols for a wave function are the Greek letters  and .
A photon is an elementary particle that is a quantum of the electromagnetic field, including electromagnetic radiation such as light and radio waves, and the force carrier for the electromagnetic force.
Photons are massless particles that can only move at one speed, the speed of light measured in a vacuum.
The photon belongs to the class of boson particles.
A neutron is a subatomic particle, symbol n or n0, that has no electric charge, and a mass slightly greater than that of a proton.
The neutron was discovered by James Chadwick in 1932, leading to the discovery of nuclear fission in 1938, the first self-sustaining nuclear reactor, and the first nuclear weapon.
A proton is a stable subatomic particle, symbol p, H+, or 1H+ with a positive electric charge of +1e (elementary charge).
Its mass is slightly less than the mass of a neutron and approximately 1836 times the mass of an electron (the proton-to-electron mass ratio).
Protons and neutrons, each with a mass of approximately one dalton, are jointly referred to as nucleons (particles present in atomic nuclei).
A quark is a type of elementary particle and a fundamental constituent of matter.
Quarks combine to form composite particles called hadrons, the most stable of which are protons and neutrons, the components of atomic nuclei.
All commonly observable matter is composed of up quarks, down quarks, and electrons.
Owing to a phenomenon known as color confinement, quarks are never found in isolation; they can be found only within hadrons, which include baryons and mesons, or in quarkgluon plasmas.
In modern physics, antimatter is defined as matter composed of the antiparticles of the corresponding particles in "ordinary" matter, and can be thought of as matter with reversed charges and parity, or going backward in time.
Antimatter occurs in natural processes like cosmic ray collisions and some types of radioactive decay.
Antiparticles can also be generated at particle accelerators, but only a tiny fraction of these have successfully been bound together in experiments to form antiatoms.
Total artificial production has been only a few nanograms.
Townes and Arthur Leonard Schawlow and the optical amplifier patented by Gordon Gould.
Deoxyribonucleic acid is a polymer composed of two polynucleotide chains that coil around each other to form a double helix.
The polymer carries genetic instructions for the development, functioning, growth and reproduction of all known organisms and many viruses.
DNA and ribonucleic acid (RNA) are nucleic acids.
Alongside proteins, lipids and complex carbohydrates (polysaccharides), nucleic acids are one of the four major types of macromolecules that are essential for all known forms of life.
The cell is the basic structural and functional unit of all forms of life or organisms.
The term comes from the Latin word cellula meaning 'small room'.
A biological cell basically consists of a semipermeable cell membrane enclosing cytoplasm that contains genetic material.
Most cells are only visible under a microscope.
Mitosis is a part of the cell cycle in eukaryotic cells in which replicated chromosomes are separated into two new nuclei.
Cell division by mitosis is an equational division which gives rise to genetically identical cells in which the total number of chromosomes is maintained.
Mitosis is preceded by the S phase of interphase and is followed by telophase and cytokinesis, which divide the cytoplasm, organelles, and cell membrane of one cell into two new cells containing roughly equal shares of these cellular components.
This process ensures that each daughter cell receives an identical set of chromosomes, maintaining genetic stability across cell generations.
Mendel studied "trait inheritance", patterns in the way traits are handed down from parents to offspring over time.
In biology, the word gene has two meanings.
The Mendelian gene is a basic unit of heredity.
The molecular gene is a sequence of nucleotides in DNA that is transcribed to produce RNA.
There are two types of molecular genes: protein-coding genes and non-coding genes.
An antibiotic is a type of antimicrobial substance which is active against bacteria.
It is the most important type of antibacterial agent for fighting bacterial infections, and antibiotic medications are widely used in the treatment and prevention of such infections.
They may either kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria.
A limited number of antibiotics also possess antiprotozoal activity.
A chemical element is a species of atom defined by its number of protons.
The number of protons is called the atomic number of that element.
For example, oxygen has an atomic number of 8: each oxygen atom has 8 protons in its nucleus.
Atoms of the same element can have different numbers of neutrons in their nuclei, known as isotopes of the element.
The periodic table, also known as the periodic table of the elements, is an ordered arrangement of the chemical elements into rows ("periods") and columns ("groups").
An icon of chemistry, the periodic table is widely used in physics and other sciences.
It is a depiction of the periodic law, which states that when the elements are arranged in order of their atomic numbers an approximate recurrence of their properties is evident.
The table is divided into four roughly rectangular areas called blocks.
A chemical bond is the association of atoms or ions to form molecules, crystals, and other structures.
The bond may result from the electrostatic force between oppositely charged ions, as in ionic bonds; the sharing of electrons, as in covalent bonds; or some combination of these effects.
Chemical bonds are described as having different strengths: there are "strong bonds" or "primary bonds" such as covalent, ionic and metallic bonds, and "weak bonds" or "secondary bonds" such as dipoledipole interactions, the London dispersion force, 
An ion is an atom or molecule with a net electrical charge.
The charge of an electron is considered to be negative by convention and this charge is equal and opposite to the charge of a proton, which is considered to be positive by convention.
The net charge of an ion is not zero because its total number of electrons is unequal to its total number of protons.
An acid is a molecule or ion capable of either donating a proton (i.e.
hydrogen cation, H+), known as a BrnstedLowry acid, or forming a covalent bond with an electron pair, known as a Lewis acid.
In chemistry, there are three definitions in common use of the word "base": Arrhenius bases, Brnsted bases, and Lewis bases.
All definitions agree that bases are substances that react with acids, as originally proposed by G.-F.
Rouelle in the mid-18th century.
In chemistry, a salt or ionic compound is a chemical compound consisting of an assembly of positively charged ions (cations) and negatively charged ions (anions), which results in a compound with no net electric charge.
The constituent ions are held together by electrostatic forces termed ionic bonds.
Redox is a type of chemical reaction in which the oxidation states of the reactants change.
Oxidation is the loss of electrons or an increase in the oxidation state, while reduction is the gain of electrons or a decrease in the oxidation state.
The oxidation and reduction processes occur simultaneously in the chemical reaction.
Catalysts generally react with one or more reactants to form intermediates that subsequently give the final reaction product, in the process of regenerating the catalyst.
A polymer is a substance or material that consists of very large molecules, or macromolecules, that are constituted by many repeating subunits derived from one or more species of monomers.
Due to their broad spectrum of properties, both synthetic and natural polymers play essential and ubiquitous roles in everyday life.
Polymers range from familiar synthetic plastics such as polystyrene to natural biopolymers such as DNA and proteins that are fundamental to biological structure and function.
Polymers, both natural and synthetic, are created via polymerization of many small molecules, known as monomers.
Biochemistry, or biological chemistry, is the study of chemical processes within and relating to living organisms.
A sub-discipline of both chemistry and biology, biochemistry may be divided into three fields: structural biology, enzymology, and metabolism.
Over the last decades of the 20th century, biochemistry has become successful at explaining living processes through these three disciplines.
Almost all areas of the life sciences are being uncovered and developed through biochemical methodology and research.
Hydrogen is a chemical element; it has the symbolH and atomic number1.
It is the lightest and most abundant chemical element in the universe, constituting about 75% of all normal matter.
Under standard conditions, hydrogen is a gas of diatomic molecules with the formulaH2, called dihydrogen, or sometimes hydrogen gas, molecular hydrogen, or simply hydrogen.
Dihydrogen is colorless, odorless, non-toxic, and highly combustible.
Platinum is a chemical element; it has symbol Pt and atomic number 78.
It is a dense, malleable, ductile, highly unreactive, precious, silverish-white transition metal.
Its name originates from Spanish platina, a diminutive of plata "silver".
The Internet is the global system of interconnected computer networks that uses the Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP) to communicate between networks and devices.
It is a network of networks that comprises private, public, academic, business, and government networks of local to global scope, linked by electronic, wireless, and optical networking technologies.
The Internet carries a vast range of information services and resources, such as the interlinked hypertext documents and applications of the World Wide Web (WWW), electronic mail, discussion groups, internet telephony, streaming media and file sharin
Machine learning (ML) is a field of study in artificial intelligence concerned with the development and study of statistical algorithms that can learn from data and generalize to unseen data, and thus perform tasks without being explicitly programmed
Advances in the field of deep learning have allowed neural networks, a class of statistical algorithms, to surpass many previous machine learning approaches in performance.
There are two main types of neural networks.In neuroscience, a biological neural network is a physical structure found in brains and complex nervous systems  a population of nerve cells connected by synapses.
Android is an open-source operating system developed by Google.
Android is based on a modified version of the Linux kernel and other free and open-source software, designed primarily for touchscreen-based mobile devices such as smartphones and tablet computers.
First released in 2008, Android is the world's most widely used operating system with 3.9 billion users; and most used operating system for smartphones.
The latest version, released on June 16, 2026, is Android 17.
Java is a high-level, general-purpose, memory-safe, object-oriented programming language.
It is intended to let programmers write once, run anywhere (WORA), meaning that compiled Java code can run on all platforms that support Java without the need to recompile.
Java applications are usually compiled to bytecode that can run on any Java virtual machine (JVM) regardless of the underlying computer architecture.
The syntax of Java is similar to C and C++, but has fewer low-level facilities than either of them.
Rust is a general-purpose programming language which emphasizes performance, type safety, concurrency, and memory safety.
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) is a style sheet language used for specifying the presentation and styling of a document written in a markup language, such as HTML or XML.
CSS is a cornerstone technology of the World Wide Web, alongside HTML and JavaScript.
Structured Query Language (SQL) is a domain-specific language used to manage data, especially in a relational database management system (RDBMS).
It is particularly useful in handling structured data, i.e., data incorporating relations among entities and variables.
Cloud computing is defined by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) as "a paradigm for enabling network access to a scalable and elastic pool of shareable physical or virtual resources with self-service provisioning and administrat
It is commonly referred to as "the cloud".
Consequently, blockchain transactions are resistant to alteration because, once recorded, the data in any given block cannot be changed retroactively without altering all subsequent blocks and obtaining network consensus to accept these changes.
From 2021 to 2025, El Salvador adopted it as legal tender currency before revoking it.
Ethereum is a decentralized blockchain with smart contract functionality.
Ether is the native cryptocurrency of the platform.
Among cryptocurrencies, ether is second only to bitcoin in market capitalization.
It is open-source software.
However, current hardware implementations of quantum computation are largely experimental and only suitable for specialized tasks.
Internet of things (IoT) describes physical objects that are embedded with sensors, processing ability, software, and other technologies that connect and exchange data with other devices and systems over the Internet or other communication networks.
The field of IoT encompasses electronics, communication, and computer science engineering.
"Internet of things" has been considered a misnomer because most devices do not need to be connected to the public Internet; they only need to be connected to a network and be individually addressable.
Robotics is the interdisciplinary study and practice of the design, construction, operation, and use of robots.
Aroboticist is someone who specializes in robotics.
Robotics usually combines four aspects of design work: a power source, mechanical construction, a control system, and software.
Biotechnology is a multidisciplinary field that involves the integration of natural sciences and engineering sciences to achieve the application of organisms and parts thereof for products and services.
Specialists in the field are known as biotechnologists.
Hence these sequences play a key role in the antiviral defense system of prokaryotes and provide a form of heritable, acquired immunity.
The Solar System is the gravitationally bound system of the Sun and the masses that orbit it, most prominently its eight planets, of which Earth is one.
The Solar System is an isolated single-star planetary system within the Milky Way Galaxy.
The system formed about 4.6billion years ago when a dense region of a molecular cloud collapsed, creating the Sun and a protoplanetary disc from which the orbiting bodies assembled.
The Sun has been an object of veneration in many cultures and a central subject of astronomical research since antiquity.
Mercury is the first planet from the Sun and the smallest in the Solar System.
It is a rocky planet with a trace atmosphere and a surface gravity slightly higher than that of Mars.
The surface of Mercury is similar to Earth's Moon, being cratered, with an expansive rupes system generated from thrust faults, and bright ray systems, formed by ejecta.
Its largest crater, Caloris Planitia, has a diameter of 1,550km (960mi), which is about one-third the diameter of the planet.
At the mean surface level, the atmosphere reaches a temperature of 737K and a pressure 92 times greater than Earth's at sea level, turning the lowest layer of the atmosphere into a supercritical fluid.
Earth is the third planet from the Sun and the only astronomical object known to harbor life.
This is made possible by Earth being an ocean world, the only one in the Solar System sustaining liquid surface water.
Almost all of Earth's water is contained in its ocean, which covers 70.8% of Earth's crust.
The remaining 29.2% of Earth's crust is land, which is predominantly located within Earth's land hemisphere in the form of continental landmasses.
Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun.
It is also known as the "Red Planet", for its orange-red appearance.
Mars is a desert-like rocky planet with a tenuous atmosphere that is primarily carbon dioxide.
At the average surface level the atmospheric pressure is a few thousandths of Earth's, atmospheric temperature ranges from 153 to 20C, and cosmic radiation is high.
Jupiter is the fifth planet from the Sun, and the largest in the Solar System.
This is a gas giant with a mass nearly 2.5 times that of all the other planets in the Solar System combined and slightly less than one-thousandth the mass of the Sun.
Its diameter is 11 times that of Earth and a tenth that of the Sun.
Jupiter orbits the Sun at a distance of 5.20AU (778.5Gm), with an orbital period of 11.86years.
Even though Saturn is almost as big as Jupiter, Saturn has less than a third of its mass.
Uranus is the seventh planet from the Sun.
It is a gaseous cyan-coloured ice giant.
Most of the planet is made of water, ammonia, and methane in a supercritical phase of matter, which astronomy calls "ice" or volatiles.
The planet's atmosphere has a complex layered cloud structure and has the lowest minimum temperature of all the Solar System's planets.
Neptune is the eighth and farthest known planet orbiting the Sun.
It is the fourth-largest planet in the Solar System by diameter, the third-most-massive planet, and the densest giant planet.
It is 17times the mass of Earth.
Compared to Uranus, its neighbouring ice giant, Neptune is slightly smaller, but more massive and dense.
Pluto is a dwarf planet in the Kuiper belt, a ring of bodies beyond the orbit of Neptune.
It is the ninth-largest and tenth-most-massive known object to directly orbit the Sun.
It is the largest known trans-Neptunian object by volume by a small margin, but is less massive than Eris.
Like other Kuiper belt objects, Pluto is made primarily of ice and rock and is much smaller than the inner planets.
The Moon is the only natural satellite of Earth.
It orbits around Earth at an average distance of 384,399 kilometers (238,854mi), a distance roughly 30 times the width of Earth.
It completes an orbit in relation to Earth and the Sun (synodically) every 29.5 days.
The Moon and Earth are bound by gravitational attraction, which is stronger on the sides facing each other.
An asteroid is a minor planetan object larger than a meteoroid that is neither a planet nor an identified cometthat orbits within the inner Solar System or is co-orbital with Jupiter.
Asteroids are rocky, metallic, or icy bodies with no atmosphere, and are broadly classified into C-type (carbonaceous), M-type (metallic), or S-type (silicaceous).
The size and shape of asteroids vary significantly, ranging from small rubble piles under a kilometer across to Ceres, a dwarf planet almost 1000km in diameter.
A body is classified as a comet, not an asteroid, if it shows a coma (tail) when warmed by solar radiation, although recent observations suggest a continuum between these types of bodies.
A comet is an icy, small Solar System body or interstellar object that warms and begins to release gases when passing close to the Sun, a process called outgassing.
This produces an extended, gravitationally unbound atmosphere or coma surrounding the nucleus, and sometimes a tail of gas and dust gas blown out from the coma.
These phenomena are due to the effects of solar radiation and the outstreaming solar wind plasma acting upon the nucleus of the comet.
Comet nuclei range from a few hundred meters to tens of kilometers across and are composed of loose collections of ice, dust, and small rocky particles.
A meteor, known colloquially as a shooting star, is a glowing streak of a small body going through Earth's atmosphere, after being heated to incandescence by collisions with air molecules in the upper atmosphere, creating a streak of light via its ra
Meteors typically occur in the mesosphere at altitudes from 76100 kilometres.
The root word meteor comes from the Greek  (meterts), meaning "high in the air".
A galaxy is a physical system of stars, stellar remnants, interstellar gas, dust, and dark matter bound together by gravity.
The word is derived from the Greek galaxias (), meaning 'milky', a reference to the Milky Way galaxy that contains the Solar System.
Galaxies, averaging an estimated 100million stars, range in size from dwarfs with less than a thousand stars to the largest galaxies knownsupergiants with one hundredtrillion stars, each orbiting its galaxy's center of mass.
Most of the mass in a typical galaxy is in the form of dark matter, with only a few percent of that mass visible in the form of stars and nebulae.
A nebula is a distinct luminescent part of interstellar medium, which can consist of ionized, neutral, or molecular hydrogen and also cosmic dust.
Nebulae are often star-forming regions, such as the Pillars of Creation in the Eagle Nebula.
In these regions, the formations of gas, dust, and other materials "clump" together to form denser regions, which attract further matter and eventually become dense enough to form stars.
The remaining material is then thought to form planets and other planetary system objects.
A star is a luminous spheroid of plasma held together by self-gravity.
The nearest star to Earth is the Sun.
Many other stars are visible to the naked eye at night; their immense distances from Earth make them appear as fixed points of light.
The most prominent stars have been categorised into constellations and asterisms, and many of the brightest stars have proper names.
An exoplanet or extrasolar planet is a planet outside the Solar System.
The first confirmed detection of an exoplanet was in 1992 around a pulsar, and the first detection around a main-sequence star was in 1995.
A different planet, first detected in 1988, was confirmed in 2003.
In 2016, it was recognized that the first possible evidence of an exoplanet had been noted in 1917, a precovery.
Space Exploration Technologies Corp., doing business as SpaceX, is an American spaceflight, telecommunications, and artificial intelligence company headquartered at the Starbase development site in Starbase, Texas.
The company operates 3 divisions: "Space", which conducts more orbital launches annually than any other launch provider, including national programs; "Connectivity", which operates Starlink, a communications satellite company; and "Artificial intelli
The company is credited with advances in rocket propulsion, reusable launch vehicles, human spaceflight, satellite constellation technology, and is considered to have significantly cheaper and more efficient launch operations compared to NASA.
The company's largest customers include NASA, the United States Space Force, and the National Reconnaissance Office.
The Hubble Space Telescope is a space telescope that was launched into low Earth orbit in 1990 and remains in operation.
It was not the first space telescope, but it is one of the largest and most versatile, renowned as a vital research tool and as a public relations boon for astronomy.
The Hubble Space Telescope is named after astronomer Edwin Hubble and is one of NASA's Great Observatories.
The Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI) selects Hubble's targets and processes the resulting data, while the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) controls the spacecraft.
These stable kingdoms existed in one of three periods: the Old Kingdom of the Early Bronze Age; the Middle Kingdom of the Middle Bronze Age; or the New Kingdom of the Late Bronze Age.
The later Western Roman Empire collapsed in 476 AD, whereas the Eastern Roman Empire persisted until the fall of Constantinople in 1453.
The Byzantine Empire, also known as the Eastern Roman Empire, was the continuation of the Roman Empire centred on Constantinople during late antiquity and the Middle Ages.
Having survived the events that caused the fall of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th centuryAD, it endured until the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453.
The term 'Byzantine Empire' was coined only after its demise; its citizens used the term 'Roman Empire' and called themselves 'Romans'.
Associated with great change in art, architecture, politics, literature, exploration and technology, the Renaissance was first centered in the Republic of Florence, then spread to the rest of Italy and later throughout Europe.
The French Revolution was a period of political and societal change in France that began with the Estates General of 1789 and ended with the Coup of 18 Brumaire on 9 November 1799.
Many of the revolution's ideas are considered fundamental principles of liberal democracy, and its values remain central to modern French political discourse.
It was caused by a combination of social, political, and economic factors which the existing regime proved unable to manage.
The following year, the Congress passed the Lee Resolution on July 2nd and unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence on July 4th.
World War I, or the First World War, also known as the Great War, was a global conflict between two coalitions: the Allies and the Central Powers.
Major areas of conflict included Europe and the Middle East, as well as parts of Africa and the Asia-Pacific.
The war saw important developments in weaponry including tanks, aircraft, artillery, machine guns, and chemical weapons.
One of the deadliest conflicts in history, it resulted in an estimated 15 to 22million military and civilian casualties and genocide.
World War II, or the Second World War, was a global conflict between two coalitions: the Allies and the Axis powers.
Nearly all of the world's countries participated.
World War II was the deadliest conflict in history, causing the death of 60 to 75 million people.
Millions died as a result of massacres, starvation, disease, and genocides, including the Holocaust.
In addition to the struggle for ideological and economic influence and an arms race in both conventional and nuclear weapons, the Cold War was expressed through technological rivalries such as the Space Race, espionage, propaganda campaigns, embargoe
The Vietnam War was an armed conflict in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia fought between North Vietnam and South Vietnam and their allies.
North Vietnam was supported by the Soviet Union and China, while South Vietnam was supported by the United States and other anti-communist nations.
The conflict was the second of the Indochina wars and a proxy war of the Cold War between the Soviet Union and US.
The Vietnam War was one of the postcolonial wars of national liberation, a theater in the Cold War, and a civil war, with civil warfare a defining feature from the outset.
In modern historiography, ancient Rome is the Roman civilisation from the founding of the Italian city of Rome in the 8th centuryBC to the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th centuryAD.
It encompasses the Roman Kingdom (753509BC), the Roman Republic (50927BC), and the Roman Empire until the fall of the western empire.
The Aztec Empire was a confederation of three city-states established in 1427: Tenochtitlan, Tetzcoco, and Tlacopan, previously part of the Tepanec empire, whose dominant power was Azcapotzalco.
The Soviet Union, officially the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), was a transcontinental country that spanned much of Eurasia from its formation in 1922 until its dissolution in 1991.
It was the world's third-most populous country, the largest by area, and bordered twelve other countries.
A diverse multinational state, it was organized as a federal union of national republics, with the largest and most populous being the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (SFSR).
The world's flagship communist state, it governed by the Communist Party under MarxismLeninism, through soviet councils.
He received the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics for "his services to theoretical physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect".
As a railroad telegrapher, he spent much of his time inventing improvements to telegraph systems.
Socrates was an ancient Greek philosopher from Classical Athens, perhaps the first Western moral philosopher, and a major inspiration on his student Plato, who largely founded the tradition of Western philosophy.
An enigmatic figure, Socrates authored no texts and is known mainly through the posthumous accounts of classical writers, particularly his students Plato and Xenophon.
These accounts are written as dialogues, in which Socrates and his interlocutors examine a subject in the style of question and answer; they gave rise to the Socratic dialogue literary genre.
Contradictory accounts of Socrates make a reconstruction of his philosophy nearly impossible, a situation known as the Socratic problem.
The Buddha then wandered through the lower Indo-Gangetic Plain, teaching and building a monastic order (sangha).
Jesus, also referred to as Jesus Christ, Jesus of Nazareth, and by various other names and titles, was a 1st-century Jewish preacher and religious leader in the Roman province of Judaea.
He is the central figure of Christianity, the world's largest religion.
Most branches of Christianity consider Jesus the incarnation of God the Son and the awaited Messiah or Christ.
Accounts of Jesus's life are contained in the Gospels, especially the four canonical Gospels of the New Testament.
For his role in these events, he is regarded as one of historys most influential figures.
He was undefeated in battle and is widely considered to be one of history's greatest and most successful military commanders.
Genghis Khan, also known as Chinggis Khan, was the founder and first khan of the Mongol Empire.
After spending most of his life uniting the Mongol tribes, he launched a series of military campaigns, conquering large parts of China and Central Asia.
After her death, Egypt became a province of the Roman Empire, marking the end of the Hellenistic period in the Mediterranean, which had begun during the reign of Alexander.
His extant works, including collaborations, consist of some 39 plays, 154 sonnets, three long narrative poems and a few other verses, some of uncertain authorship.
Johann Sebastian Bach was a German composer and musician of the late Baroque period.
He is known for his prolific output across a variety of instruments and forms, including the orchestral Brandenburg Concertos; solo instrumental works such as the Cello Suites and Sonatas and Partitas for Solo Violin; keyboard works such as the Goldb
Matthew Passion and the Mass in B minor.
He is known for his mastery of counterpoint, as heard in The Musical Offering and The Art of Fugue.
Pablo Diego Jos Francisco de Paula Juan Nepomuceno Mara de los Remedios Cipriano de la Santsima Trinidad Ruiz y Picasso was a Spanish painter and sculptor who spent most of his adult life in France.
One of the most influential artists of the 20th century, he is known for co-founding the Cubist movement, the invention of constructed sculpture, the co-invention of collage, and for the wide variety of styles that he helped develop and explore.
Among his most famous works are the proto-Cubist Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907) and the anti-war painting Guernica (1937), a dramatic portrayal of the bombing of Guernica by German and Italian air forces during the Spanish Civil War.
His career spanned more than 76 years, from his late teens to his death in 1973.
George Washington was a Founding Father and the first president of the United States, serving from 1789 to 1797.
As commander of the Continental Army, Washington led Patriot forces to victory in the American Revolutionary War against the British Empire.
He is commonly known as the Father of His Country for his role in bringing about American independence.
Steven Paul Jobs was an American businessman, inventor, and investor.
A pioneer of the personal computer revolution of the 1970s and 1980s, Jobs co-founded Apple Inc.
with his early business partner Steve Wozniak as Apple Computer Company in 1976.
After the company's board of directors fired him in 1985, he founded NeXT the same year and purchased Pixar in 1986, becoming its chairman and majority shareholder until 2007.
Mark Elliot Zuckerberg is an American businessman and programmer who co-founded the social media service Facebook and its parent company Meta Platforms.
He is its chairman, chief executive officer (CEO), and controlling shareholder.
Jeffrey Preston Bezos is an American businessman, and the founder, executive chairman, and former president and CEO of Amazon, the world's largest e-commerce and cloud computing company.
According to the Bloomberg Billionaires Index and Forbes, he was the world's wealthiest person from 2017 to 2021, and in 2026 his net worth was approximately US$284 billion.
The Pacific Ocean is the largest and deepest of Earth's five oceanic divisions.
It stretches from the Arctic Ocean in the north to the Southern Ocean, or, depending on the definition, to Antarctica in the south, and is bounded by the continents of Asia and Australia in the west and the Americas in the east.
The Amazon River in South America is the largest river by discharge volume of water in the world, and the second-longest or longest river system in the world, a title which is disputed with the Nile.
The Yangtze River, Yangzi River or Chang Jiang is the longest river in China and the third-longest river in the world.
It rises at Jari Hill in the Tanggula Mountains of the Tibetan Plateau and flows for 6,236 kilometers (3,875mi), including the Dam Qu River, the longest source of the Yangtze, in a generally easterly direction to the East China Sea.
It is the fifth-largest primary river by discharge volume in the world.
Its drainage basin comprises one-fifth of the land area of China, and is home to nearly one-third of the country's population.
K2, also known as Mount Godwin-Austen, at 8,611 metres (28,251ft) above sea level, is the second-highest mountain on Earth, after Mount Everest at 8,849 metres (29,032ft).
It lies in the Karakoram range, partially in the Gilgit-Baltistan region of Pakistan-administered Kashmir and partially in the China-administered Trans-Karakoram Tract in the Taxkorgan Tajik Autonomous County of Xinjiang.
The Sahara is a desert spanning North Africa.
With an area of 9,200,000 square kilometres (3,600,000sqmi), it is the largest hot desert in the world and the third-largest desert overall, smaller only than the deserts of Antarctica and the northern Arctic.
Europe is commonly considered to be separated from Asia by the watershed of the Ural Mountains, the Ural River, the Caspian Sea, the Greater Caucasus, the Black Sea, and the Turkish straits.
The United States also asserts sovereignty over five major island territories and various uninhabited islands in Oceania and the Caribbean.
Beijing is the capital, while Shanghai is the most populous city by urban area.
In the Indian Ocean, India is near Sri Lanka and the Maldives.
Japan is divided into 47 administrative prefectures and eight traditional regions, and around 75% of its terrain is mountainous and heavily forested, concentrating its agriculture and highly urbanized population along its eastern coastal plains.
It shares a land border with the Republic of Ireland and is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, the North Sea, the English Channel, the Celtic Sea and the Irish Sea, while maintaining sovereignty over the Crown Dependencies and the British Overseas Ter
Its metropolitan area extends from the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean and from the Mediterranean Sea to the English Channel and the North Sea.
The country is characterized by a wide range of both meteorologic and geological regions.
Its most populous city is So Paulo, followed by Rio de Janeiro.
With a population exceeding 134 million as of 2026, Mexico is the tenth-most populous country in the world and is home to the largest number of native Spanish speakers.
It shares land borders with Papua New Guinea, Timor-Leste, and Malaysia, as well as maritime borders with seven other countries, including Australia, Singapore, and the Philippines.
Officially a secular state, Turkey has a Muslim-majority population.
European Netherlands has land borders with Germany to the east and with Belgium to the south, and a coastline to the north and west.
Its capital and largest city is Stockholm.
Its capital and largest city is Oslo.
It is the southernmost of the Scandinavian countries, lying southwest of Sweden, south of Norway, and north of Germany, with which it shares a short border.
Finland, officially the Republic of Finland, is a Nordic country in Northern Europe.
It borders Sweden to the northwest, Norway to the north, and Russia to the east, with the Gulf of Bothnia to the west and the Gulf of Finland to the south, opposite Estonia.
Its capital and largest city is Helsinki.
Finland has a population of 5.7 million.
Ireland is an island in the North Atlantic Ocean, in Northwestern Europe.
Geopolitically, the island is divided between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland.
It is separated from Great Britain to its east by the North Channel, the Irish Sea, and St George's Channel.
Ireland is the second-largest island of the British Isles, the third-largest in Europe, and the twentieth-largest in the world.
New Zealand is an island country in the southwestern Pacific Ocean.
It consists of two main landmassesthe North Island and the South Island and over 600 smaller islands.
It is the sixth-largest island country by area and lies east of Australia across the Tasman Sea and south of the islands of New Caledonia, Fiji, and Tonga.
The country's varied topography and sharp mountain peaks, including the Southern Alps, owe much to tectonic uplift and volcanic eruptions.
Jerusalem is the government seat and proclaimed capital, while Tel Aviv is Israel's largest urban area and economic centre.
Cairo is the capital, largest city, and leading cultural centre, while Alexandria is the second-largest city and an important hub of industry and tourism.
Its nine provinces are bounded to the south by 2,798 kilometres of coastline that stretches along the South Atlantic, and Indian Ocean; to the north by the neighbouring countries of Namibia, Botswana, and Zimbabwe
to the east and northeast by Mozambique, and Eswatini, and it encloses Lesotho.
Pretoria is the administrative capital, while Cape Town, as the seat of Parliament, is the legislative capital, and Bloemfontein is regarded as the judicial capital.
Nigeria borders Niger in the north, Chad in the northeast, Cameroon in the east, and Benin in the west.
The second-largest and oldest city is Mombasa, a port city located on Mombasa Island.
Morocco, officially the Kingdom of Morocco, is a country in the Maghreb region of North Africa.
It has coastlines on the Mediterranean Sea to the north and the Atlantic Ocean to the west, and has land borders with Algeria to the east; the Spanish exclaves of Ceuta, Melilla and Pen de Vlez de la Gomera along the north, which it claims together w
Morocco also claims to share a border with Mauritania through the disputed territory of Western Sahara.
It has a population of approximately 37 million.
Argentina is a federal state subdivided into twenty-three provinces, and one autonomous city, which is the federal capital and largest city of the nation, Buenos Aires.
The Capital District of Bogot is the country's largest city hosting the main financial and cultural hub.
The country covers a territorial area of 756,102 square kilometers (291,933sqmi), sharing borders with Peru to the north, Bolivia to the northeast, Argentina to the east, and the Drake Passage to the south.
Medicine is the science and practice of caring for patients, managing the diagnosis, prognosis, prevention, treatment and palliation of their injury or disease, while promoting their health.
Medicine encompasses a variety of health care practices which evolved to maintain and restore health through the prevention and treatment of illness and infection.
Contemporary medicine applies biomedical sciences, biomedical research, genetics, and medical technology to diagnose, treat, and prevent injury and disease, typically through various pharmaceuticals or surgery, but also through therapies such as psyc
The agent stimulates the immune system to recognize the agent as a threat, destroy it, and recognize further and destroy any of the microorganisms associated with that agent that it may encounter in the future.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease and is the most common form of dementia, accounting for around 6070% of cases.
The most common early symptom is difficulty in remembering recent events.
As the disease advances, symptoms can include problems with language, disorientation, mood swings, loss of motivation, self-neglect, and behavioral issues.
As a person's condition declines, they often withdraw from family and society.
Anatomy is the branch of morphology concerned with the study of the internal and external structure of organisms and their parts.
Anatomy is a branch of natural science that deals with the structural organization of living things.
It is an old science, having its beginnings in prehistoric times.
Pharmacology is the science of drugs and medications, including a substance's origin, composition and interaction with biological systems; specifically through pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, therapeutic use, and toxicology.
The discipline examines these interactions through pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, both of which determine how a substance alters normal or abnormal biochemical function.
Substances with medicinal properties are classified as pharmaceuticals, while the term drug encompasses any chemical agent that alters biological processes.
Nanopharmacology is the specialization of pharmacology in the nanoscale.
Ultrasonic devices operate with frequencies from 20kHz up to several gigahertz.
White blood cells are transfused only in very rare circumstances, since granulocyte transfusion has limited applications.
Probability concerns events and numerical descriptions of how likely they are to occur.
The probability of an event is a number between 0 and 1; the larger the probability, the more likely an event is to occur.
This number is often expressed as a percentage (%), ranging from 0% to 100%.
A simple example is the tossing of a fair (unbiased) coin.
Number theory is a branch of mathematics devoted primarily to the study of the integers and arithmetic functions.
Number theorists study prime numbers as well as the properties of mathematical objects constructed from integers, or defined as generalizations of the integers.
Linear algebra is the branch of mathematics concerning linear equations such as
In mathematics, a differential equation is an equation that relates one or more unknown functions and their derivatives.
In applications, the functions generally represent physical quantities, the derivatives represent their rates of change, and the differential equation defines a relationship between the two.
Such relations are common in mathematical models and scientific laws; therefore, differential equations play a prominent role in many disciplines including engineering, physics, economics, and biology.
Topology is the branch of mathematics concerned with the properties of a geometric object that are preserved under continuous deformations, such as stretching, twisting, crumpling, and bending; that is, without closing holes, opening holes, tearing, 
The number  is a mathematical constant, approximately equal to 3.14159, that is the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter.
It appears in many formulae across mathematics and physics, and some of these formulae are commonly used for defining , to avoid relying on the definition of the length of a curve.
In mathematics, the Fibonacci sequence is a sequence in which each element is the sum of the two elements that precede it.
Numbers that are part of the Fibonacci sequence are known as Fibonacci numbers, commonly denoted Fn.
The initial elements of the sequence are F1 = 1 and F2 = 1, though many authors also include a zeroth element F0 = 0.
Starting from F0, the sequence begins0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, ...
A prime number is a natural number greater than 1 that is not a product of two smaller natural numbers.
A natural number greater than 1 that is not prime is called a composite number.
For example, 5 is prime because the only ways of writing it as a product, 1  5 or 5  1, involve 5 itself.
However, 4 is composite because it is a product (22) in which both numbers are smaller than 4.
Infinity is something which is boundless, limitless, or endless.
It is denoted by , called the infinity symbol.
0 is a number representing an empty quantity.
Adding 0 to any number leaves that number unchanged; in mathematical terminology, 0 is the additive identity of the integers, rational numbers, real numbers, and complex numbers, as well as other algebraic structures.
Multiplying any number by 0 results in 0, and consequently dividing by 0 is generally considered to be undefined in arithmetic.
Ethics is the philosophical study of moral phenomena.
Also called moral philosophy, it investigates normative questions about what people ought to do or which behavior is morally right.
Its main branches include normative ethics, applied ethics, and metaethics.
Socialism is an economic and political philosophy encompassing diverse economic and social systems characterised by social ownership of the means of production, as opposed to private ownership.
It describes the economic, political, and social theories and movements associated with the implementation of such systems.
Social ownership can take various forms, including public, community, collective, cooperative, or employee.
As one of the main ideologies on the political spectrum, socialism is the standard left-wing ideology in most countries.
Communism is a political and economic ideology whose goal is the creation of a communist society, a socioeconomic order centered on common ownership of the means of production, distribution, and exchange that allocates products in society based on ne
A communist society entails the absence of private property and social classes, and ultimately money and the state.
Liberalism is a political and moral philosophy based on the rights of the individual, liberty, consent of the governed, political equality, right to private property, and equality before the law.
Different liberals espouse various and sometimes conflicting views depending on their understanding of these principles but generally support liberal democracy, private property, market economies, individual rights, secularism, rule of law, economic 
Liberalism is frequently cited as the dominant ideology of modern history.
Human rights are universally recognized moral principles or norms that establish standards of human behavior and are often protected by both national and international laws.
These rights are considered inherent and inalienable, meaning they belong to every individual simply by virtue of being human.
They encompass a broad range of civil, political, economic, social, and cultural rights, such as the right to life, freedom of speech, protection against enslavement, and right to education.
The United Nations (UN) is a global intergovernmental organization established by the signing of the Charter of the United Nations on 26 June 1945 with the articulated mission of maintaining international peace and security, to develop friendly relat
The European Union (EU) is a political and economic union of 27 member states that are located primarily in Europe.
A supranational union with a total area of 4,233,255km2 (1,634,469sqmi) and an estimated population of over 450million as of 2025, its member states generated a nominal gross domestic product (GDP) of around 18.802 trillion in 2025, accounting for ap
The EU is often described as a sui generis political entity combining characteristics of both a federation and a confederation.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is an intergovernmental military alliance between 32 member states.
Founded in the aftermath of World War II, NATO was established with the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty in 1949.
The organization serves as a system of collective security and deterrence, whereby its independent members agree to defend each-other from attack by any outside party.
This is enshrined in Article 5 of the treaty, which states that an armed attack against the territory of one member shall be considered an attack against them all.
The World Bank Group (WBG) is a family of five international organizations that make leveraged loans to developing countries.
The group is the largest development bank in the world.
It is headquartered in Washington, D.C., United States.
The bank's stated mission is to achieve the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and building shared prosperity.
Economics is a social science that studies the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services.
In economics, inflation is an increase in the average price of goods and services in terms of money.
This increase is measured using a price index, typically a consumer price index (CPI).
When the general price level rises, each unit of currency buys fewer goods and services; consequently, inflation corresponds to a reduction in the purchasing power of money.
The opposite of inflation is deflation, a decrease in the general price level of goods and services.
Gross domestic product (GDP) is a monetary measure of the total market value of all of the final goods and services which are produced and rendered during a specific period of time by a country or countries.
GDP is often used to measure the economic activity of a country or region.
The major components of GDP are consumption, government spending, net exports, and investment.
Changing any of these factors can increase the size of the economy.
A stock market, equity market, or share market is the aggregation of buyers and sellers of stocks, which represent ownership claims on businesses; these may include securities listed on a public stock exchange as well as stock that is only traded pri
Investments are usually made with an investment strategy in mind.
Education is the transmission of knowledge and skills and the development of character traits.
Formal education happens in a complex institutional framework, like public schools.
Non-formal education is also structured but occurs outside the formal schooling system, while informal education is unstructured learning through daily experiences.
Formal and non-formal education are divided into levels that include early childhood education, primary education, secondary education, and tertiary education.
Jazz is a music genre that originated in the African-American communities of New Orleans, Louisiana, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Its roots are in blues, ragtime, European harmony, African rhythmic rituals, spirituals, hymns, marches, vaudeville song, and dance music.
Since the 1920s Jazz Age, it has been recognized as a major form of musical expression in traditional and popular music.
Jazz is characterized by swing and blue notes, complex chords, call and response vocals, polyrhythms and improvisation.
Sculpture is the branch of the visual arts that operates in three dimensions.
Sculpture is the three-dimensional artwork which is physically presented in the dimensions of height, width and depth.
It is one of the plastic arts.
Durable sculptural processes originally used carving and modelling, in stone, metal, ceramics, wood and other materials but, since Modernism, there has been almost complete freedom of materials and process.
Poetry is a form of literary art that uses aesthetic and often rhythmic qualities of language to evoke meanings in addition to, or in place of, literal or surface-level meanings.
Depending on the genre particular instances or even a group of instances of poetry is called a poem and is written by a poet.
Poets use a variety of techniques called poetic devices, such as assonance, alliteration, consonance, euphony and cacophony, onomatopoeia, rhythm, rhyme schemes and sound symbolism, to produce musical or other artistic effects.
They also frequently organize these devices into poetic structures, which may be strict or loose, conventional or invented by the poet.
Although musical theatre is closely related to opera, the two are considered to be distinct from one another.
The modern Olympic Games are among the biggest sporting events on Earth.
They feature summer and winter sports events in which thousands of athletes from 206 countries and territories around the world participate in a variety of athletic competitions.
The Olympic Games, open to both amateur and professional athletes, involve more than 200 teams, each team representing a sovereign state or territory.
The Games often, but not always, substitute for any world championships during the year in which they take place.
Agriculture is the practice of cultivating the soil, planting, raising, and harvesting both food and non-food crops, as well as livestock production.
Broader definitions also include forestry and aquaculture.
Agriculture was a key factor in the rise of sedentary human civilization, whereby farming of domesticated plants and animals created food surpluses that enabled people to live in the cities.
While humans started gathering grains at least 105,000 years ago, nascent farmers only began planting them around 11,500 years ago.
Tea is an aromatic beverage prepared by pouring hot or boiling water over cured or fresh leaves of Camellia sinensis, an evergreen shrub native to East Asia which originated in the borderlands of south-western China, north-east India and northern Mya
Tea is also made, but rarely, from the leaves of Camellia taliensis.
After plain water, tea is the most widely consumed drink in the world.
There are many types of tea; some have a cooling, slightly bitter, and astringent flavour, while others have profiles that include sweet, nutty, floral, or grassy notes.
The lion is a large cat of the genus Panthera, currently ranging only in Sub-Saharan Africa and India.
It has a muscular, broad-chested body; a short, rounded head; round ears; and a dark, hairy tuft at the tip of its tail.
It is sexually dimorphic; adult male lions are larger than females and have a prominent mane that extends from the head to the shoulders and chest.
Distinctive features of elephants include a long proboscis called a trunk, tusks, large ear flaps, pillar-like legs, and tough but sensitive grey skin.
Dolphins and porpoises may be considered whales from a formal, cladistic perspective.
Sharks are a group of elasmobranch cartilaginous fishes characterized by a ribless endoskeleton, dermal denticles, five to seven gill slits on each side, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head.
Modern sharks are classified within the division Selachii and are the sister group to the Batomorphi.
Some sources extend the term "shark" as an informal category including extinct members of Chondrichthyes with a shark-like morphology, such as hybodonts.
Shark-like chondrichthyans such as Cladoselache and Doliodus first appeared in the Devonian Period, though some fossilized chondrichthyan-like scales are as old as the Late Ordovician.
An octopus is a soft-bodied, eight-limbed mollusc of the order Octopoda.
The order consists of some 300 species and is grouped within the class Cephalopoda with squids, cuttlefish, and nautiloids.
Like other cephalopods, an octopus is bilaterally symmetric with two eyes and a beaked mouth at the centre point of the eight limbs.
An octopus can radically deform its shape, enabling it to squeeze through small gaps.
Butterflies are winged insects from the lepidopteran superfamily Papilionoidea, characterised by large, often brightly coloured wings that often fold together when at rest, and a conspicuous, fluttering flight.
The oldest butterfly fossils have been dated to the Paleocene, about 56 million years ago, though molecular evidence suggests that they likely originated in the Cretaceous.
An oak is a hardwood tree or shrub in the genus Quercus of the beech family.
They have spirally arranged leaves, often with lobed edges, and a nut called an acorn, borne within a cup.
The genus is widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere, with some 500 species, both deciduous and evergreen.
Fossil oaks date back to the Middle Eocene.
A pine is any conifer in the genus Pinus of the family Pinaceae.
Pinus is the sole genus in the subfamily Pinoideae.
The species are evergreen trees or shrubs with their leaves in bunches, usually of 2 to 5 needles.
The seeds are carried on woody cones, with two seeds to each cone scale.
Bamboos are a diverse group of mostly evergreen perennial flowering plants making up the subfamily Bambusoideae of the grass family Poaceae.
Giant bamboos are the largest members of the grass family, in the case of Dendrocalamus sinicus having individual stalks (culms) reaching a length of 46 meters (151ft), up to 36 centimeters (14in) in diameter and a weight of up to 450 kilograms (1,00
It grows in tropical and subtropical regions, especially in Asia.
The internodes of bamboos can also be of great length.
A rose is either a woody perennial flowering plant of the genus Rosa, in the family Rosaceae, or the flower it bears.
There are over three hundred species and tens of thousands of cultivars.
The plants range in size and form, from trailing and erect shrubs to climbers up to 7 metres (23ft) in height.
Sharp prickles appear on the stems of many species.
Orchids are plants that belong to the family Orchidaceae, a diverse and widespread group of flowering plants with blooms that are often colourful and fragrant.
Orchids are cosmopolitan plants, living in diverse habitats on every continent except Antarctica.
The world's richest diversity of orchid genera and species is in the tropics.
Many species are epiphytes, living on trees.
Civil engineering is a professional engineering discipline that deals with the design, construction, and maintenance of the physical and naturally built environment, including public works such as roads, bridges, canals, dams, airports, sewage system
Mechanical engineering is the study of physical machines and mechanisms that may involve force and movement.
It is an engineering branch that combines engineering physics and mathematics principles with materials science, to design, analyze, manufacture, and maintain mechanical systems.
It is one of the oldest and broadest of the engineering branches.
Electrical engineering is an engineering discipline concerned with the study, design, and application of equipment, devices, and systems that use electricity, electronics, and electromagnetism.
It emerged as an identifiable occupation in the latter half of the 19th century after the commercialization of the electric telegraph, the telephone, and electrical power generation, distribution, and use.
Chemical engineering is an engineering field which deals with the study of the operation and design of chemical plants as well as methods of improving production.
Chemical engineers develop economical commercial processes to convert raw materials into useful products.
Chemical engineering uses principles of chemistry, physics, mathematics, biology, and economics to efficiently use, produce, design, transport and transform energy and materials.
Aerospace engineering is the primary field of engineering concerned with the development of aircraft and spacecraft.
It has two major and overlapping branches: aeronautical engineering and astronautical engineering.
Avionics engineering is similar, but deals with the electronics side of aerospace engineering.
A bridge is a structure designed to span an obstacle, such as a river or railway, allowing vehicles, pedestrians, and other loads to pass across.
Most bridges consist of a flat deck, supported by beams, arches, or cables.
These structures rest on a foundation that is carefully designed to transfer the weight of the bridge to the subsoil without settling.
A dam is a structure that impounds water or restricts its flow.
Dams are classified into four basic types: gravity dams are massive structures made of concrete or masonry that rely on their weight to resist the force of impounded water; embankment dams are large earthworks consisting of rocks, clay, sand, soil, o
A skyscraper is a very tall building or otherwise permanently habitable structure, typically defined as reaching a minimum height of either 100 metres (328ft) or 150 metres (492ft) in height; however, there remains no universally accepted definition 
Skyscrapers can host a variety of spaces, typically including office, commercial, hotel, and residential space.
Skyscrapers are a common feature in the downtown or central business districts (CBD) of major cities, especially in the Americas, Asia, and Australia, often due to a high demand for space and limited availability of land.
A tunnel is an underground or undersea passageway.
It is dug through surrounding soil, earth or rock, or laid under water, and is usually completely enclosed except for the two portals common at each end, though there may be access and ventilation openings at various points along the length.
A pipeline differs significantly from a tunnel, though some recent tunnels have used immersed tube construction techniques rather than traditional tunnel boring methods.
A solar panel is a device that converts sunlight into electricity by using multiple solar modules that consists of photovoltaic (PV) cells.
PV cells are made of materials that produce excited electrons when exposed to light.
These electrons flow through a circuit and produce direct current electricity, which can be used to power various devices or be stored in batteries.
Solar panels can be known as solar cell panels, or solar electric panels.
An electric battery is a source of electric power consisting of one or more electrochemical cells with external connections for powering electrical devices.
When a battery is supplying power, its positive terminal is the cathode and its negative terminal is the anode.
The terminal marked negative is the source of electrons.
When a battery is connected to an external electric load, those negatively charged electrons flow through the circuit and reach the positive terminal, thus causing a redox reaction by attracting positively charged ions, or cations.
In physics, gravity, also known as gravitation or a gravitational interaction, is a fundamental interaction, which may be described as the force that draws material objects towards each other.
The speed of light in vacuum, often called simply the speed of light and commonly denoted c, is a universal physical constant exactly equal to 299792458ms1.
It is exact because, by international agreement, a metre is defined as the length of the path travelled by light in vacuum during a time interval of 1299792458 second.
The value 299,792,458 metres per second is approximately 1billion kilometres per hour; 700million miles per hour.
For other approximations of c valid for various units and size scales see the infobox.
A black hole is an astronomical body so compact that its gravity prevents anything, including light, from escaping.
Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity, which describes gravitation as the curvature of spacetime, predicts that any sufficiently compact mass will form a black hole.
The boundary of no escape is called the event horizon.
In general relativity, crossing a black hole's event horizon traps an object inside but produces no locally detectable change.
The peak optical luminosity of a supernova can be comparable to that of an entire galaxy before fading over several weeks or months.
The Big Bang is a physical theory that describes how the universe expanded from an initial state of high density and temperature.
The observed uniformity of the universe, which leads to the horizon and flatness problems, is explained through cosmic inflation: a phase of accelerated expansion during the earliest stages.
Detailed measurements of the expansion rate of the universe place the initial singularity at an estimated 13.7870.02billion years ago, which is considered the age of the universe.
The theory of relativity comprises two physics theories by Albert Einstein: special relativity and general relativity, proposed and published in 1905 and 1915, respectively.
Special relativity applies to all physical phenomena in the absence of gravity.
General relativity explains the law of gravitation and its relation to the forces of nature.
It applies to the cosmological and astrophysical realm, including astronomy.
In physics, electromagnetic radiation (EMR) or an electromagnetic wave (EMW) is a self-propagating wave of the electromagnetic field that carries momentum and radiant energy through space.
It encompasses a broad spectrum, classified by frequency, ranging from radio waves, microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays, to gamma rays.
All forms of EMR travel at the speed of light in a vacuum and exhibit waveparticle duality, behaving both as waves and as discrete particles called photons.
An X-ray is a form of high-energy electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength shorter than those of ultraviolet rays and longer than those of gamma rays.
Roughly, X-rays have a wavelength ranging from 10nanometers to 10picometers, corresponding to frequencies in the range of 30petahertz to 30exahertz (31016Hz to 31019Hz) and photon energies in the range of 100eV to 100keV, respectively.
A gamma ray, also known as gamma radiation (symbol ), is a penetrating form of electromagnetic radiation arising from high-energy interactions like the radioactive decay of atomic nuclei or astronomical events like solar flares.
Lower energy gamma radiation overlaps the upper end of X-ray radiation; they are distinguished by their different origins.
Gamma ray photons have photon energy at the lower end from 104 eV to 107 eV; ultra-high-energy gamma rays have energies over 1014 eV.
Paul Villard, a French chemist and physicist, discovered gamma radiation in 1900 while studying radiation emitted by radium.
Infrared is electromagnetic radiation (EMR) with wavelengths longer than that of visible light but shorter than microwaves.
The infrared spectral band begins with the waves that are just longer than those of red light, so IR is invisible to the human eye.
IR is generally understood to include wavelengths from around 780nm (380THz) to 1mm (300GHz).
IR is commonly divided between longer-wavelength thermal IR, emitted from terrestrial sources, and shorter-wavelength IR, or near IR, part of the solar spectrum.
Ultraviolet radiation is electromagnetic radiation of wavelengths of 100400 nanometers, shorter than that of visible light, but longer than X-rays.
Wavelengths between 10 and 100 nanometers are called extreme ultraviolet and share some properties with soft X-rays.
UV radiation is present in sunlight and constitutes about 10% of the total electromagnetic radiation output from the Sun.
It is also produced by electric arcs, Cherenkov radiation, and specialized lights, such as mercury-vapor lamps, tanning lamps, and black lights.
Microwave is a form of electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths shorter than other radio waves but longer than infrared waves.
Its wavelength ranges from about one meter to one millimeter, corresponding to frequencies between 300MHz and 300GHz, broadly construed.
A more common definition in radio-frequency engineering is the range between 1 and 100GHz, or between 1 and 3000GHz.
In all cases, microwaves include the entire super high frequency (SHF) band at minimum.
Radio waves with frequencies above about 1GHz and wavelengths shorter than 30centimeters are called microwaves.
Like all electromagnetic waves, radio waves in a vacuum travel at the speed of light, and in the Earth's atmosphere at a slightly lower speed.
Radio waves are generated by charged particles undergoing acceleration, such as time-varying electric currents.
More broadly, acoustic waves encompass mechanical longitudinal waves in general.
Frequency is the number of occurrences of a repeating event per unit of time.
Frequency is an important parameter used in science and engineering to specify the rate of oscillatory and vibratory phenomena, such as mechanical vibrations, audio signals (sound), radio waves, and light.
In physics and mathematics, wavelength or spatial period of a wave or periodic function is the distance over which the wave's shape repeats.
In other words, it is the distance between consecutive corresponding points of the same phase on the wave, such as two adjacent crests, troughs, or zero crossings.
Wavelength is a characteristic of both traveling waves and standing waves, as well as other spatial wave patterns.
The inverse of the wavelength is called the spatial frequency.
The amplitude of a periodic variable is a measure of its change in a single period.
The amplitude of a non-periodic signal is its magnitude compared with a reference value.
There are various definitions of amplitude, which are all functions of the magnitude of the differences between the variable's extreme values.
In older texts, the phase of a periodic function is sometimes called the amplitude.
Energy is the quantitative property that is transferred to a body or to a physical system, recognizable in the capacity to do work and in the form of heat and light.
Energy is a conserved quantitythe law of conservation of energy states that energy can be converted in form, but not created or destroyed.
The unit of measurement for energy in the International System of Units (SI) is the joule (J).
In physics, a force is an action that can cause an object to change its velocity or its shape, or to resist other forces, or to cause changes of pressure in a fluid.
In mechanics, force makes ideas like pushing or pulling mathematically precise.
Because the magnitude and direction of a force are both important, force is a vector quantity.
The SI unit of force is the newton (N), and force is often represented by the symbol F.
In physics, mass is an intrinsic positive physical quantity of a body, which measures its resistance to acceleration.
In modern physics, it is generally defined as the strength of an object's gravitational attraction to other bodies  as measured by an observer moving along at the same speed.
The unit of mass in the International System of Units (SI) is the kilogram (kg).
In physics, acceleration is a measure of how fast and in what direction an object's speed and direction of motion are changing.
It is defined as the rate of change of the velocity.
Like velocity, acceleration has a magnitude and a direction, making it a vector quantity.
The SI unit for acceleration is metre per second squared.
Velocity is a measurement of speed in a certain direction of motion.
It is a fundamental concept in kinematics, the branch of classical mechanics that describes the motion of physical objects.
Velocity is a vector quantity, meaning that both magnitude and direction are needed to define it.
The scalar absolute value (magnitude) of velocity is called speed, a quantity that is measured in metres per second in the SI system.
In Newtonian mechanics, momentum is the product of the mass and velocity of an object.
It is a vector quantity, possessing a magnitude and a direction.
In science, work is the energy transferred to or from an object via the application of force along a displacement.
In its simplest form, for a constant force aligned with the direction of motion, the work equals the product of the force strength and the distance traveled.
A force is said to do positive work if it has a component in the direction of the displacement of the point of application.
A force does negative work if it has a component opposite to the direction of the displacement at the point of application of the force.
Power is the amount of energy transferred or converted per unit time.
In the International System of Units, the unit of power is the watt, equal to one joule per second (J/s).
Power is a scalar quantity.
The Internet protocol suite, commonly known as TCP/IP, is a framework for organizing the communication protocols used in the Internet and similar computer networks according to functional criteria.
The foundational protocols in the suite are the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), the User Datagram Protocol (UDP), and the Internet Protocol (IP).
HTTP is an application layer protocol in the Internet protocol suite for distributed, collaborative, hypermedia information systems.
HTTP is the foundation of data communication for the World Wide Web, where hypertext documents include hyperlinks to other resources that the user can easily access, for example by a mouse click or by tapping the screen in a web browser.
The Domain Name System (DNS) is a hierarchical and distributed name service that provides a naming system for computers, services, and other resources on the Internet or other Internet Protocol (IP) networks.
It associates various information with domain names assigned to each of the associated entities.
Most prominently, it translates readily memorized domain names to the numerical IP addresses needed for locating and identifying computer services and devices with the underlying network protocols.
The Domain Name System has been an essential component of the functionality of the Internet since 1985.
HDMI is a brand of proprietary digital interface used to transmit high-quality video and audio signals between devices.
It is commonly used to connect devices such as televisions, computer monitors, projectors, gaming consoles, and personal computers.
HDMI supports uncompressed video and digital audio either compressed or uncompressed, allowing a single cable to carry all audiovisual signals.
REST is a software architectural style that was created to describe the design and guide the development of the architecture for the World Wide Web.
REST defines a set of constraints for how the architecture of a distributed, Internet-scale hypermedia system, such as the Web, should behave.
GraphQL is a data query and manipulation language that allows specifying what data is to be retrieved or modified.
A GraphQL server can process a client query using data from separate sources and present the results in a unified graph.
The language is not tied to any specific database or storage engine.
There are several open-source runtime engines for GraphQL.
JSON is an open standard file format and data interchange format that uses human-readable text to store and transmit data objects consisting of namevalue pairs and arrays.
It is a commonly used data format with diverse uses in electronic data interchange, including that of web applications with servers.
Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a markup language and file format for storing, transmitting, and reconstructing data.
It defines a set of rules for encoding documents in a format that is both human-readable and machine-readable.
The World Wide Web Consortium's XML 1.0 Specification of 1998 and several other related specificationsall of them free open standardsdefine XML.
The RSA (RivestShamirAdleman) cryptosystem is a family of public-key cryptosystems, widely used for secure data transmission.
The initialism "RSA" comes from the surnames of Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir and Leonard Adleman, who publicly described the algorithm in 1977.
An equivalent system was developed secretly in 1973 at Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), the British signals intelligence agency, by the English mathematician Clifford Cocks.
That system was declassified in 1997.
The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), also known by its original name Rijndael, is a specification for the encryption of electronic data established by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in 2001.
A hash function is any function that can be used to map data of arbitrary size to fixed-size values, though there are some hash functions that support variable-length output.
The values returned by a hash function are called hash values, hash codes, (hash/message) digests, or simply hashes.
The values are usually used to index a fixed-size table called a hash table.
Use of a hash function to index a hash table is called hashing or scatter-storage addressing.
A digital signature is a mathematical scheme for verifying the authenticity of digital messages or documents.
A valid digital signature on a message gives a recipient confidence that the message came from a sender known to the recipient.
Dogs were the first species to be domesticated over 14,000 years ago, before the development of agriculture, though genetic studies suggest the domestication process may have begun over 25,000 years ago.
The cat, also called domestic cat and house cat, is a small domesticated carnivorous mammal.
It is a member of Felidae, the family of mammals in the order Carnivora also colloquially referred to as cats.
It is an obligate carnivore, requiring a predominantly meat-based diet.
Its retractable claws are adapted to killing small prey species such as mice and rats.
The horse is a domesticated, one-toed, hoofed mammal.
It belongs to the taxonomic family Equidae and is one of two extant subspecies of Equus ferus.
The horse has evolved over the past 45 to 55million years from a small multi-toed creature, Eohippus, into the large single-toed animal of today, originally in North America.
Humans began domesticating horses around 4000 BCE in Central Asia, and their domestication is believed to have been widespread by 3000 BCE.
Cattle are large, domesticated, bovid ungulates widely kept as livestock.
They are prominent modern members of the subfamily Bovinae and the most widespread species of the genus Bos.
Mature female cattle are called cows, immature females are called heifers, mature intact males are called bulls, castrated males are called steers or oxen, and young animals of either sex are called calves.
The pig, also called swine or hog, is an omnivorous, domesticated, even-toed, hoofed mammal.
It is named the domestic pig when distinguishing it from other members of the genus Sus.
Some authorities consider it a subspecies of Sus scrofa ; other authorities consider it a distinct species.
Pigs were domesticated independently twice during the Neolithic, in the Near East around the Tigris Basin, and in China.
The chicken is the domesticated form of the red junglefowl, originally native to Southeast Asia.
It was first domesticated around 8,000 years ago and is one of the most common and widespread domesticated animals in the world.
Chickens are primarily kept for their meat and eggs, though they are also kept as pets.
Sheep or domestic sheep are a domesticated, ruminant mammal typically kept as livestock.
Although the term sheep can apply to other species in the genus Ovis, in everyday usage it almost always refers to domesticated sheep.
Like all ruminants, sheep are members of the order Artiodactyla, the even-toed ungulates.
There are around 1.2 billion domestic sheep as of 2019, making them easily the most common species of sheep.
The collective name for a group of crows is a "murder".
Flamingos or flamingoes are a type of wading bird in the family Phoenicopteridae, which is the only extant family in the order Phoenicopteriformes.
There are four flamingo species distributed throughout the Americas, and two species native to Afro-Eurasia.
Turtles are reptiles characterized by a special shell developed mainly from their ribs, as well as keratinized toothless beak.
Modern turtles are divided into two major groups, the Pleurodira and Cryptodira, which differ in the way the head retracts.
There are 360 living and recently extinct species of turtles, including land-dwelling tortoises and freshwater terrapins.
They are found on most continents, some islands and, in the case of sea turtles, much of the ocean.
Lizard is the common name used for all squamate reptiles other than snakes, encompassing over 7,000 species, ranging across all continents except Antarctica, as well as most oceanic island chains.
The grouping is paraphyletic as some lizards are more closely related to snakes than they are to other lizards.
Living lizards range in size from chameleons and geckos a few centimeters long to the 3-meter-long Komodo dragon.
Starfish or sea stars are a class of marine invertebrates generally shaped like a star polygon.
Starfish are also known as asteroids because they form the taxonomic class Asteroidea.
About 1,900 species of starfish live on the seabed, and are found in all the world's oceans, from warm, tropical zones to frigid, polar regions.
They can occur from the intertidal zone down to abyssal depths, at 6,000m (20,000ft) below the surface.
Sea urchins or urchins are the class Echinoidea within the echinoderms.
They typically have a globular body covered by spiny protective tests, typically from 3 to 10cm across.
Sea urchins move slowly, crawling with their tube feet, and sometimes pushing themselves with their spines.
Corals are colonial marine invertebrates within the subphylum Anthozoa of the phylum Cnidaria.
They typically form compact colonies of many identical individual polyps.
Coral species include the important reef builders that inhabit tropical oceans and secrete calcium carbonate to form a hard skeleton.
Sponges or sea sponges are primarily marine invertebrates of the animal phylum Porifera.
They are sessile filter feeders that are bound to the seabed, and are one of the most ancient members of macrobenthos, with many historical species being important reef-building organisms.
It is one of the oldest human-made foods, having been of significance since the dawn of agriculture, and plays an essential role in both religious rituals and secular culture.
Cheese is a type of dairy product produced in a range of flavors, textures, and forms by coagulation of the milk protein casein.
It is composed of proteins and fat from milk, usually of cows, goats or sheep, and sometimes of water buffalo.
During production, milk is usually acidified and either the enzymes of rennet or bacterial enzymes with similar activity are added to cause the casein to coagulate.
The solid curds are then separated from the liquid whey and pressed into finished cheese.
This refinement takes place both within individual bees, through regurgitation and enzymatic activity, and during storage in the hive, through water evaporation that concentrates the honey's sugars until it is thick and viscous.
Sugar is a class of sweet-tasting, soluble carbohydrates, many of which are used in food.
Simple sugars, also called monosaccharides, include glucose, fructose and galactose.
Compound sugars, also called disaccharides or double sugars, are molecules made of two bonded monosaccharides; common examples are sucrose, lactose and maltose.
White sugar is almost pure sucrose.
Salt is a mineral composed primarily of sodium chloride (NaCl).
When used in food, especially in granulated form, it is more formally called table salt.
In the form of a natural crystalline mineral, salt is also known as rock salt or halite.
Salt is essential for life in general, and saltiness is one of the basic human tastes.
Apples have been grown for thousands of years in Eurasia before they were introduced to North America by European colonists.
It grows upward in clusters near the top of the plant.
A grape is a fruit, botanically a berry, of the deciduous woody vines of the flowering plant genus Vitis.
Grapes are a non-climacteric type of fruit, generally occurring in clusters.
A mango is an edible stone fruit produced by the tropical tree Mangifera indica.
It originated in the northeastern part of the Indian subcontinent, in what is now Bangladesh, northeastern India and Myanmar.
indica has been cultivated in South and Southeast Asia since ancient times, resulting in two modern mango cultivar lineages: the "Indian" and the "Southeast Asian" types.
The pineapple is a tropical plant with an edible fruit; it is the most economically significant plant in the family Bromeliaceae.
Aluminium or aluminum is a chemical element; it has symbolAl and atomic number13.
It has a density lower than other common metals, about one-third that of steel.
Aluminium has a great affinity toward oxygen, forming a protective layer of oxide on the surface when exposed to air.
It visually resembles silver, both in its color and in its great ability to reflect light.
Titanium is a chemical element; it has symbol Ti and atomic number 22.
Found in nature only as an oxide, it can be reduced to produce a lustrous transition metal with a silver color, low density, and high strength that is resistant to corrosion in sea water, aqua regia, and chlorine.
Bronze is an alloy consisting primarily of copper, commonly with about 1212.5% tin and often with the addition of other metals and sometimes non-metals or metalloids.
These additions produce a range of alloys some of which are harder than copper alone or have other useful properties, such as strength, ductility, or machinability.
Leather is a strong, flexible and durable material obtained from the tanning, or chemical treatment, of animal skins and hides to prevent decay.
The most common leathers come from cattle, sheep, goats, equine animals, buffalo, pigs and hogs, ostriches, and aquatic animals such as seals and alligators.
Cotton is a soft, fluffy staple fiber that grows in a boll, or protective case, around the seeds of the cotton plants of the genus Gossypium in the mallow family Malvaceae.
The fiber is almost pure cellulose and may contain minor percentages of waxes, fats, pectins, and water.
Under natural conditions, cotton bolls facilitate the dispersal of the seeds.
Silk is a natural protein fiber, some forms of which can be woven or knitted into textiles.
The protein fiber of silk is composed mainly of fibroin (75-80%) and a smaller coating of sericin (20-25%).
It is most commonly produced from the cocoons of certain insect larvae.
The best-known silk is obtained from the cocoons of the larvae of the mulberry silkworm Bombyx mori, which are reared in captivity (sericulture).
Wool is the textile fiber obtained from sheep and other mammals, especially goats, rabbits, and camelids.
The term may also refer to inorganic materials, such as mineral wool and glass wool, that have some properties similar to animal wool.
Paper is a thin sheet of matted cellulose fibers.
Largely derived from lignocellulose, paper is created from a pulp dissolved into a slurry that is drained and dried into sheets.
Different types of paper are defined by constituent fiber, paper pulp, sizing, coating, paper size, paper density and grammage.
Cardboard is a generic term for heavy paper-based products ranging from a thick paper known as paperboard to corrugated fiberboard.
Plywood is a composite material manufactured from thin layers, or "plies", of wood veneer that have been stacked and glued together.
It is an engineered wood from the family of manufactured boards, which include plywood, medium-density fibreboard (MDF), oriented strand board (OSB), and particle board.
Carbon fiber -reinforced polymers are extremely strong and light fiber-reinforced plastics that contain carbon fibers.
Kevlar (para-aramid) is a strong, heat-resistant synthetic fiber, related to other aramids such as Nomex and Technora.
Developed by Stephanie Kwolek at DuPont in 1965, the high-strength material was first used commercially in the early 1970s as a replacement for steel in racing tires.
It is typically spun into ropes or fabric sheets that can be used as such, or as an ingredient in composite material components.
Passive solar techniques include designing a building for better daylighting, selecting materials with favorable thermal mass or light-dispersing properties, and organizing spaces that naturally circulate air.
Wind power is the use of wind energy to generate useful work.
Historically, wind power was used by sails, windmills and windpumps, but today it is mostly used to generate electricity.
This article deals only with wind power for electricity generation.
Today, wind power is generated almost completely using wind turbines, generally grouped into wind farms and connected to the electrical grid.
Nuclear power is the use of nuclear reactions to produce electricity.
Nuclear power can be obtained from nuclear fission, nuclear decay and nuclear fusion reactions.
Presently, the vast majority of electricity from nuclear power is produced by nuclear fission of uranium and plutonium in nuclear power plants.
Nuclear decay processes are used in niche applications such as radioisotope thermoelectric generators in some space probes such as Voyager 2.
Coal is a combustible black or brownish-black sedimentary rock, formed as layers called coal seams.
Coal is mostly carbon with variable amounts of other elements, chiefly hydrogen, sulfur, oxygen, and nitrogen.
It is a fossil fuel, formed when plants decay into peat which is converted into coal by the heat and pressure of deep burial over millions of years.
Vast deposits formed from wetlands called coal forests that covered much of the tropics during the late Carboniferous and early Permian.
Biofuel is a fuel that is produced over a short time span from biomass, rather than by the very slow natural processes involved in the formation of fossil fuels such as oil.
Biofuels are mostly used for transportation, but can also be used for heating and electricity.
Biofuels are regarded as a renewable energy source.
A supercapacitor (SC), also called an ultracapacitor, is a high-capacity capacitor, with a capacitance value much higher than solid-state capacitors but with lower voltage limits.
It bridges the gap between electrolytic capacitors and rechargeable batteries.
Football is a family of team sports in which the object is to get the ball over a goal line, into a goal, or between goalposts using merely the body.
Swimming is an individual or team racing sport that requires the use of one's entire body to move through water.
The sport takes place in pools or open water.
Competitive swimming is one of the most popular Olympic sports, with varied distance events in butterfly, backstroke, breaststroke, freestyle, and individual medley.
In addition to these individual events, four swimmers can take part in either a freestyle or medley relay.
The holes are closed by leather pads attached to keys operated by the player.
Accordions are a family of box-shaped musical instruments of the bellows-driven free reed aerophone type.
The essential characteristic of the accordion is to combine in one instrument a melody section, also called the diskant, usually on the right-hand keyboard, with an accompaniment or basso continuo functionality on the left-hand.
The musician normally plays the melody on buttons or keys on the right-hand side, and the accompaniment on bass or pre-set chord buttons on the left-hand side.
A person who plays the accordion is called an accordionist.
In some other languages such as BASIC, Python, or Ruby  a variable is more accurately described as a name associated with a value, with memory allocation handled transparently by the interpreter or runtime.
A variable can eventually be associated with or identified by a memory address.
The variable name is the usual way to reference the stored value, in addition to referring to the variable itself, depending on the context.
This separation of name and content allows the name to be used independently of the exact information it represents.
In computer programming, a function is a callable unit of software logic that has a well-formed interface and behavior and can be invoked multiple times.
Object-oriented programming (OOP) is a programming paradigm based on objects  software entities that encapsulate data and function(s).
An OOP computer program consists of objects that interact with one another.
An OOP language is one that provides object-oriented programming features, but as the set of features that contribute to OOP is contested, classifying a language as OOP  and the degree to which it supports OOP  is debatable.
As paradigms are not mutually exclusive, a language can be multi-paradigm.
In computer science, recursion is a method of solving a computational problem where the solution depends on solutions to smaller instances of the same problem.
Recursion solves such recursive problems by using functions that call themselves from within their own code.
The approach can be applied to many types of problems, and recursion is one of the central ideas of computer science.The power of recursion evidently lies in the possibility of defining an infinite set of objects by a finite statement.
In the same manner, an infinite number of computations can be described by a finite recursive program, even if this program contains no explicit repetitions.
In computer science, an array is a data structure consisting of a collection of elements, of the same memory size, each identified by at least one array index or key, the collection of which may be a tuple, known as an index tuple.
In general, an array is a mutable and linear collection of elements with the same data type.
An array is stored such that the position of each element can be computed from its index tuple by a mathematical formula.
The simplest type of data structure is a linear array, also called a one-dimensional array.
In computer science, a linked list is a linear collection of data elements whose order is not given by their physical placement in memory.
Instead, each element points to the next.
It is a data structure consisting of a collection of nodes which together represent a sequence.
In its most basic form, each node contains data, and a reference to the next node in the sequence.
This structure allows for efficient insertion or removal of elements from any position in the sequence during iteration.
In computer science, a binary tree is a tree data structure in which each node has at most two children, referred to as the left child and the right child.
That is, it is a k-ary tree where k = 2.
A recursive definition using set theory is that a binary tree is a triple (L, S, R), where L and R are binary trees or the empty set and S is a singleton (a singleelement set) containing the root.
In computer science, a hash table is a data structure that implements an associative array, also called a dictionary or simply map; an associative array is an abstract data type that maps keys to values.
A hash table uses a hash function to compute an index, also called a hash code, into an array of buckets or slots, from which the desired value can be found.
During lookup, the key is hashed and the resulting hash indicates where the corresponding value is stored.
A map implemented by a hash table is called a hash map.
In computer science, a stack is an abstract data type that serves as a collection of elements with two main operations:Push, which adds an element to the collection, and
Pop, which removes the most recently added element.
In computer science, a queue is an abstract data type that serves as an ordered collection of entities.
By convention, the end of the queue where elements are added is called the back, tail, or rear of the queue.
The end of the queue where elements are removed is called the head or front of the queue.
The name queue is an analogy to the words used to describe people in line to wait for goods or services.
It supports two main operations.Enqueue, which adds one element to the rear of the queue
Dequeue, which removes one element from the front of the queue.
In computer science, a sorting algorithm is an algorithm that puts elements of a list into an order.
The most frequently used orders are numerical order and lexicographical order, and either ascending order or descending order.
Efficient sorting is important for optimizing the efficiency of other algorithms that require input data to be in sorted lists.
Sorting is also often useful for canonicalizing data and for producing human-readable output.
In computer science, binary search, also known as half-interval search, logarithmic search, or binary chop, is a search algorithm that finds the position of a target value within a sorted array.
Binary search compares the target value to the middle element of the array.
If they are not equal, the half in which the target cannot lie is eliminated and the search continues on the remaining half, again taking the middle element to compare to the target value, and repeating this until the target value is found.
If the search ends with the remaining half being empty, the target is not in the array.
In computer science, a graph is an abstract data type that is meant to implement the undirected graph and directed graph concepts from the field of graph theory within mathematics.
A regular expression, sometimes referred to as a rational expression, is a sequence of characters that specifies a match pattern in text.
Usually such patterns are used by string-searching algorithms for "find" or "find and replace" operations on strings, or for input validation.
Regular expression techniques are developed in theoretical computer science and formal language theory.
In computer science, a thread of execution is the smallest sequence of programmed instructions that can be managed independently by a scheduler, which is typically a part of the operating system.
In many cases, a thread is a component of a process.
In computing, a process is the instance of a computer program that is being executed by one or many threads.
Depending on the OS, a process may be made up of multiple threads of execution that execute instructions concurrently.
Memory management is a form of resource management applied to computer memory.
The essential requirement of memory management is to provide ways to dynamically allocate portions of memory to programs at their request, and free it for reuse when no longer needed.
This is critical to any advanced computer system where more than a single process might be underway (multitasking) at any time.
In computing, a cache is a hardware or software component that stores data so that future requests for that data can be served faster; the data stored in a cache might be the result of an earlier computation or a copy of data stored elsewhere.
A cache hit occurs when the requested data can be found in a cache, while a cache miss occurs when it cannot.
Cache hits are served by reading data from the cache, which is faster than recomputing a result or reading from a slower data store; thus, the more requests that can be served from the cache, the faster the system performs.
In computing, load balancing is the process of distributing a set of tasks over a set of resources with the aim of making their overall processing more efficient.
Load balancing can optimize response time and avoid unevenly overloading some compute nodes while other compute nodes are left idle.
Newton's laws of motion are three physical laws that describe the relationship between the motion of an object and the forces acting on it.
These laws, which provide the basis for Newtonian mechanics, can be paraphrased as follows:A body remains at rest, or in motion at a constant speed in a straight line, unless it is acted upon by a force.
At any instant of time, the net force on a body is equal to the body's acceleration multiplied by its mass or, equivalently, the rate at which the body's momentum is changing with time.
If two bodies exert forces on each other, these forces have the same magnitude but opposite directions.
The law of conservation of energy states that the total energy of an isolated system remains constant; it is said to be conserved over time.
In the case of a closed system, the principle says that the total amount of energy within the system can only be changed through energy entering or leaving the system.
Energy can neither be created nor destroyed; rather, it can only be transformed or transferred from one form to another.
For instance, chemical energy is converted to kinetic energy when a stick of dynamite explodes.
If one adds up all forms of energy that were released in the explosion, such as the kinetic energy and potential energy of the pieces, as well as heat and sound, one will get the exact decrease of chemical energy in the combustion of the dynamite.
The uncertainty principle, also known as Heisenberg's indeterminacy principle, is a fundamental concept in quantum mechanics.
It states that there is a limit to the precision with which certain pairs of physical properties, such as position and momentum, can be simultaneously known.
In other words, the more accurately one property is measured, the less accurately the other property can be known.
Maxwell's equations are a set of coupled partial differential equations that describe how electric and magnetic fields are generated by electric charges and currents.
Together with the Lorentz force law, they form the foundation of classical electromagnetism, classical optics, electric and magnetic circuits.
The equations provide a mathematical model for electric, optical, and radio technologies, such as power generation, electric motors, wireless communication, lenses, radar, etc.
The speed of sound is the distance travelled per unit of time by a sound wave as it propagates through an elastic medium.
More simply, the speed of sound is how fast vibrations travel.
At 20C (68F), the speed of sound in air is about 343m/s, or 1km in 2.92s or one mile in 4.69s.
It depends strongly on temperature as well as the medium through which a sound wave is propagating.
At 0C (32F), the speed of sound in dry air is about 331m/s.
Tokyo, officially the Tokyo Metropolis, is the capital and most populous city of Japan.
The population of the city proper was over 14 million as of 2023.
The Greater Tokyo Area, which includes Tokyo and parts of six neighboring prefectures, is the third-most populous metropolitan area in the world, with 33 million residents as of 2025.
London is the capital and largest city of England and the United Kingdom, with a population of 9.1 million people in 2024.
Its wider metropolitan area is the largest in Western Europe, with a population of 15.4million.
London stands on the River Thames in southeast England, at the head of a 50-mile (80km) tidal estuary down to the North Sea, and has been a major settlement for nearly 2,000years.
Its ancient core and financial centre, the City of London, was founded by the Romans as Londinium and has retained its medieval boundaries.
The City of Westminster, to the west of the City of London, has been the site of the national government and parliament for centuries.
Paris is the capital and largest city of France, with an estimated city population of 2.04 million in an area of 105.4km2 (40.7sqmi), and a metropolitan population of 13.2 million as of January2026.
Located on the river Seine in the centre of the le-de-France region, it is the largest metropolitan area and fourth-most populous city in the European Union (EU).
Nicknamed the "City of Light", partly because of its role in the Age of Enlightenment, Paris has been one of the world's major centres of finance, diplomacy, commerce, culture, fashion, and gastronomy since the 17th century.
Rome is the capital city and most populated comune (municipality) of Italy.
It is also the administrative centre of the Lazio region and of the Metropolitan City of Rome.
A special comune named Roma Capitale with a population of 2.7 million in an area of 1,287.36km2 (497.1mi2), Rome is the third most populous city in the European Union by population within city limits.
The Metropolitan City of Rome Capital, with a population of 4.2 million, is the most populous metropolitan city in Italy.
Its metropolitan area is the third-most populous within Italy.
Seoul, officially Seoul Special Metropolitan City, is the capital and largest city of South Korea, and the largest city in the whole of Korea.
Although Seoul's population peaked at over 10 million, it has gradually decreased since 2014, standing at about 9.6 million residents as of 2024.
Jakarta, officially the Special Capital Region of Jakarta, is the capital and largest city of Indonesia, with administrative status equivalent to a province.
It lies on the northwestern coast of Java, borders the provinces of West Java and Banten, and faces the Java Sea to the north.
Jakarta itself covers about 662 square kilometres, but the wider Jakarta metropolitan arealocally known as Jabodetabekis among the largest urban agglomerations in the world by area.
By population, Greater Jakarta is the most populous urban area in the world with a population of over 40 million.
Jakarta is Indonesia's political, economic, and cultural centre and contains many national institutions, corporate headquarters, and the secretariat of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Lagos, or Lagos City, is a large metropolitan port city in southwestern Nigeria.
Shanghai is a provincial-level direct-administered municipality in China.
It has a population of 30,050,000 in the urban area as of 2026, thus making it China's most populous city and more broadly the fifth-largest city in the world by population.
The city is located on the Chinese shoreline on the southern estuary of the Yangtze River, with the Huangpu River bisecting the city.
New York, often called New York City (NYC), is the most populous city in the United States.
It is located at the southern tip of New York State on New York Harbor, one of the world's largest natural harbors.
The city comprises five boroughsManhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx, and Staten Island; each is coextensive with its respective county.
It is the geographical and demographic center of both the Northeast megalopolis and the New York metropolitan area, the largest metropolitan area in the United States by both population and urban area.
New York is a global center of finance and commerce, culture, technology, entertainment and media, academics and scientific output, the arts and fashion, and, as home to the headquarters of the United Nations, international diplomacy.
Sydney is the capital city of the state of New South Wales, and the most populous city in Australia.
Greater Sydney consists of 658 suburbs, spread across 33 local government areas.
Residents of the city are colloquially known as "Sydneysiders".
The estimated population in June 2025 was 5,638,830, which is about 66% of the state's population.
Taipei, officially Taipei City, is the capital and a special municipality of Taiwan.
Located in Northern Taiwan, Taipei City is an enclave of the municipality of New Taipei City that sits about 25 kilometres (16mi) southwest of the northern port city of Keelung.
Most of the city rests on the Taipei Basin, an ancient lakebed.
The basin is bounded by the relatively narrow valleys of the Keelung and Xindian rivers, which join to form the Tamsui River along the city's western border.
Osaka  is a designated city in the Kansai region of Honshu in Japan.
It is the capital of and most populous city in Osaka Prefecture, and the third-most populous city in Japan, following the special wards of Tokyo and Yokohama.
Istanbul is the largest city in Turkey, constituting the country's economic, cultural, and historical center.
With a population of over 15 million, it is home to 18% of the population of Turkey.
Istanbul is among the largest cities in Europe and in the world by population.
It is a city on two continents; about two-thirds of its population live in Europe and the rest in Asia.
Istanbul straddles the Bosphorus  one of the world's busiest waterways  in northwestern Turkey, between the Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea.
Stephen William Hawking was an English theoretical astrophysicist, cosmologist, and author who was director of research at the Centre for Theoretical Cosmology at the University of Cambridge.
Between 1979 and 2009, he was the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge, widely viewed as one of the most prestigious academic posts in the world.
Max Karl Ernst Ludwig Planck was a German theoretical physicist.
He was awarded the 1918 Nobel Prize in Physics "for the services he rendered to the advancement of physics by his discovery of energy quanta".
Maxwell's equations for electromagnetism achieved the second great unification in physics, where the first one had been realised by Isaac Newton.
Maxwell was also key in the creation of statistical mechanics.
Michael Faraday was an English chemist and physicist who contributed vastly to the study of electrochemistry and electromagnetism.
His main discoveries include the principles underlying electromagnetic induction, diamagnetism, and electrolysis.
Although Faraday received little formal education, as a self-made man, he was one of the most influential scientists in history.
It was by his research on the magnetic field around a conductor carrying a direct current that Faraday established the concept of the electromagnetic field in physics.
Faraday also established that magnetism could affect rays of light and that there was an underlying relationship between the two phenomena.
Euclid was an ancient Greek mathematician active as a geometer and logician.
Considered the "father of geometry", he is chiefly known for the Elements treatise, which established the foundations of geometry that largely dominated the field until the early 19th century.
His system, now referred to as Euclidean geometry, involved innovations in combination with a synthesis of theories from earlier Greek mathematicians, including Eudoxus of Cnidus, Hippocrates of Chios, Thales and Theaetetus.
With Archimedes and Apollonius of Perga, Euclid is generally considered among the greatest mathematicians of antiquity, and one of the most influential in the history of mathematics.
Johann Carl Friedrich Gauss was a German mathematician, astronomer, geodesist, and physicist, who contributed to many fields in mathematics and science.
His mathematical contributions spanned the branches of number theory, algebra, analysis, geometry, statistics, and probability.
Gauss was director of the Gttingen Observatory in Germany and professor of astronomy from 1807 until his death in 1855.
Leonhard Euler was a Swiss polymath who was active as a mathematician, physicist, astronomer, logician, geographer, music theorist and engineer.
He founded the studies of graph theory and topology and made influential discoveries in many other branches of mathematics, such as analytic number theory, complex analysis, and infinitesimal calculus.
He also introduced much of modern mathematical terminology and notation, including the notion of a mathematical function.
He is known for his work in mechanics, fluid dynamics, optics, astronomy, and music theory.
Euler has been called a "universal genius" who "was fully equipped with almost unlimited powers of imagination, intellectual gifts and extraordinary memory".
Pierre-Simon, Marquis de Laplace was a French polymath, a scholar whose work has been instrumental in the fields of physics, astronomy, mathematics, engineering, statistics, and philosophy.
He summarized and extended the work of his predecessors in his five-volume Mcanique cleste (17991825).
This work translated the geometric study of classical mechanics to one based on calculus, opening up a broader range of problems.
Laplace also popularized and further confirmed Sir Isaac Newton's work.
In statistics, the Bayesian interpretation of probability was developed mainly by Laplace.
Amalie Emmy Noether was a German mathematician who made many important contributions to abstract algebra.
She also proved Noether's first and second theorems, which are fundamental in mathematical physics.
Noether was described by Pavel Alexandrov, Albert Einstein, Jean Dieudonn, Hermann Weyl, and Norbert Wiener as the most important woman in the history of mathematics.
As one of the leading mathematicians of her time, she developed theories of rings, fields, and algebras.
In physics, Noether's theorem explains the connection between symmetry and conservation laws.
John von Neumann was a Hungarian and American mathematician, physicist, computer scientist and engineer.
Von Neumann had perhaps the widest coverage of any mathematician of his time, integrating pure and applied sciences and making major contributions to many fields, including mathematics, physics, economics, computing, and statistics.
His analysis of the structure of self-replication preceded the discovery of the structure of DNA.
Kenneth Lane Thompson is an American pioneer of computer science.
Thompson worked at Bell Labs for most of his career where he designed and implemented the original Unix operating system.
He also invented the B programming language, the direct predecessor to the C language, and was one of the creators and early developers of the Plan 9 operating system.
Television (TV) is a telecommunication medium for transmitting moving images and sound.
Additionally, the term can refer to a physical television set rather than the medium of transmission.
Television is a mass medium for advertising, entertainment, news, and sports.
The medium is capable of more than "radio broadcasting", which refers to an audio signal sent to radio receivers.
A printing press is a mechanical machine that transfers ink onto materials such as paper or cloth by applying pressure to an inked surface.
It marked a major advance on earlier methods, in which ink was applied to the printing surface and the paper was rubbed by hand to transfer it.
The invention and global spread of the printing press was one of the most influential developments of the early modern period.
An internal combustion engine is a heat engine in which the combustion of a fuel occurs with an oxidizer in a combustion chamber that is an integral part of the working fluid flow circuit.
In an internal combustion engine, the expansion of the high-temperature and high-pressure gases produced by combustion applies direct force to components of the engine.
The force is typically applied to pistons, turbine blades, a rotor, or a nozzle.
This force moves the component over a distance.
This process transforms chemical energy into kinetic energy which is used to propel, move or power whatever the engine is attached to.
An electric light, lamp, or light bulb is an electrical device that produces light from electricity.
It is the most common form of artificial lighting.
Lamps usually have a base made of ceramic, metal, glass, or plastic that secures them in the socket of a light fixture.
The electrical connection to the socket may be made with a screw-thread base, two metal pins, two metal caps or a bayonet mount.
Penicillins are a group of -lactam antibiotics originally obtained from Penicillium moulds, principally P.
Eight species of Penicillium, in the section Chrysogena, produce penicillins.
Most penicillins in clinical use are synthesised by P.
Time is the continuous progression of existence that occurs in an apparently irreversible succession from the past, through the present, and into the future.
Time is often referred to as the fourth dimension and the temporal dimension, in addition to the three spatial dimensions.
Space is a three-dimensional continuum containing positions and directions.
In classical physics, physical space is often conceived in three linear dimensions.
Modern physicists usually consider it, with time, to be part of a boundless four-dimensional continuum known as spacetime.
The concept of space is considered to be of fundamental importance to an understanding of the physical universe.
However, disagreement continues between philosophers over whether it is itself an entity, a relationship between entities, or part of a conceptual framework.
In physical science, matter is any substance that has mass and takes up space by having volume.
All everyday objects that can be touched are ultimately composed of atoms, which are made up of interacting subatomic particles.
In everyday as well as scientific usage, matter generally includes atoms and anything made up of them, and any particles that act as if they have both rest mass and volume.
However it does not include massless particles such as photons, or other energy phenomena or waves such as light or heat.
Matter exists in various states.
Information is an abstract concept that refers to something which has the power to inform.
At the most fundamental level, it pertains to the interpretation of that which may be sensed, or their abstractions.
Any natural process that is not completely random and any observable pattern in any medium can be said to convey some amount of information.
Whereas digital signals and other data use discrete signs to convey information, other phenomena and artifacts such as analogue signals, poems, pictures, music or other sounds, and currents convey information in a more continuous form.
Information is not knowledge itself, but the meaning that may be derived from a representation through interpretation.
Consciousness is being aware of something internal to one's self, or of states or objects in one's external environment.
It has been the topic of extensive explanations, analyses, and debate among philosophers, scientists, and theologians for millennia.
There is no consensus on what exactly needs to be studied, or whether consciousness can be considered a scientific concept.
In some explanations it is synonymous with mind, while in others it is considered an aspect of it.
Intelligence has been defined in many ways: the capacity for abstraction, logic, understanding, self-awareness, learning, emotional knowledge, reasoning, planning, creativity, critical thinking, and problem-solving.
It can be described as the ability to perceive or infer information and to retain it as knowledge to be applied to adaptive behaviors within an environment or context.
Memory is the faculty of the mind by which data or information is encoded, stored, and retrieved when needed.
It is the retention of information over time for the purpose of influencing future action.
If past events could not be remembered, it would be impossible for language, relationships, or personal identity to develop.
Memory loss is usually described as forgetfulness or a disorder such as amnesia.
Learning is the process of acquiring new understanding, knowledge, behavior, skills, values, attitudes, and preferences.
The ability to learn is possessed by humans, other animals, and some machines.
There is also evidence for some kind of learning in certain plants.
Some learning is immediate, induced by a single event, but much skill and knowledge accumulate from repeated experiences.
The changes induced by learning often last a lifetime, and it is hard to distinguish learned material that seems to be "lost" from that which cannot be retrieved.
Knowledge is an awareness of facts, a familiarity with individuals and situations, or a practical skill.
Descriptive knowledge, also called propositional knowledge, is often characterized as true belief that is distinct from opinion or guesswork by virtue of justification.
While there is wide agreement among philosophers that propositional knowledge is a form of true belief, many controversies focus on justification.
This includes questions like how to understand justification, whether it is needed at all, and whether something else besides it is needed.
These controversies intensified in the latter half of the 20th century due to a series of thought experiments called Gettier cases that provoked alternative definitions.
Truth is conformity to reality or fact.
It contrasts with falsity or misrepresentation that fails to align with the world.
Truth is typically treated as a property of truthbearers, such as sentences, propositions, or beliefs that describe things as they are.
It is closely related to truthfulness, a virtue associated with honesty, and to truthlikeness, a characteristic of theories that approximate the truth.
Beauty is commonly described as a feature of objects that makes them pleasurable to perceive.
Such objects include landscapes, sunsets, humans and works of art.
Beauty, art and taste are the main subjects of aesthetics, one of the fields of study within philosophy.
As a positive aesthetic value, it is contrasted with ugliness as its negative counterpart.
In its broadest sense, justice is the treatment of individuals fairly.
Freedom is the power or right to speak, act, and change as one wants without hindrance or restraint.
Freedom is often associated with liberty and autonomy in the sense of "giving oneself one's own laws".
Equality generally refers to the fact of being equal, of having the same value.
In specific contexts, equality may refer to:
Complexity characterizes the behavior of a system or model whose components interact in multiple ways and follow local rules, leading to non-linearity, randomness, collective dynamics, hierarchy, and emergence.
Jebel is a commune in Timi County, Romania.
It is composed of a single village, Jebel, and also included the village of Pdureni until 2004, when it was split off to form a separate commune.
It is the seat of the Concepcin Province and the capital of the Biobo Region.
It sits about 500km south of the nation's capital, Santiago.
Turbiteen is a breed of pigeon developed in the Middle East with selective breeding.
It is primarily considered an Oriental Frill type breed.
The Turbiteen along with other varieties of domesticated pigeons are all descendants from the rock dove.
Alexandr Sergeevich Kharitonov is a Russian chess grandmaster (2006).
Mayurbhanj State Bank was a public sector bank that had its headquarters at Baripada, Odisha, India.
Marriage is the third and final studio album by American rock duo Deap Vally.
It was released on November 19, 2021, via Cooking Vinyl.
Scarlet Ortiz March 12, 1974 is a Venezuelan actress and beauty pageant titleholder.
She is known for her role in telenovelas.
Gardula Zone is one of the zones in the South Ethiopia Regional State of Ethiopia.
In 2011, the zone was demarcated in the former Segen Area Peoples Zone which was established by Derashe and other three former special woredas surrounding it.
It received zonal status when the South Ethiopia Regional State formed in August 2023.
The region is an important agricultural area, known for its farming of cereal crops and cash crops like Khat.
The Peabody Trust was founded in 1862 as the Peabody Donation Fund and now brands itself simply as Peabody.
Choi Bool-am is a South Korean retired actor and a professor.
The LBH gene is a highly conserved human gene that produces the LBH protein, a transcription co-factor in the Wnt/-catenin pathway.
Upon transcriptional activation of -catenin, LBH goes on to act as a regulator of cell proliferation and differentiation through multiple transcriptional targets.
The gene is located on the p arm of chromosome 2 and is roughly 28 kb long.
Current ongoing studies are examining its role in developmental and oncological settings.
Goes Station is a small unincorporated community in northern Xenia Township, Greene County, Ohio, United States.
It sits at the intersection of Snively Road and U.S.
Route 68 between Xenia and Yellow Springs.
Mlarhjden is a station on Line 13 of the Red line of the Stockholm Metro, located in the Mlarhjden district.
The station opened on 16 May 1965 as part of the extension from rnsberg to Stra.
It is 7.5km (4.7mi) from the Slussen.
Alisca is a genus of planthoppers in the subfamily Ricaniinae, erected by Carl Stl in 1870.
The FIA European Touring Car Cup was an annual touring car racing event, which had been held at various locations across Europe from 2005 to 2017.
Unlike in previous years where it was a one-off event, in 2010 the series was a three-round event.
Zonkeys in Tijuana, Mexico are donkeys painted with fake zebra stripes, so that tourists will pay the owner to appear in souvenir photos with them.
They should not be confused with zebroids, zebra hybrids which are also sometimes called zonkeys.
Ascaric, a Visigoth, was the fourth known Bishop of Palencia from about 639 to about 673.
He only appears as a signatory of the canons of the Eighth Council of Toledo in 653.
A local tradition, however, places him at the side of king Wamba during the Septimanian rebellion of Paul and Hilderic in 672.
To Ascaric is sometimes credited the reedification of Palencia and the deposition of the relics of Antoninus of Pamiers in the Crypt of San Antoln.
The Berkeley Marina is the westernmost portion of the city of Berkeley, California, located west of the Eastshore Freeway at the foot of University Avenue on San Francisco Bay.
Narrowly speaking, "Berkeley Marina" refers only to the city marina, but in common usage, it applies more generally to the surrounding area.
The Berkeley Marina is a hub for various water activities, offering opportunities for kayaking, stand-up paddleboarding, windsurfing, open-water swimming, and kiteboarding.
Outdoor enthusiasts gather to enjoy the scenic bay, catch the wind for a sail, or practice their water sports skills.
Fabiana "Dara" Carvalho Carneiro Diniz is a retired Brazilian handball player.
She played on the Brazilian national team that won the 2013 World Championship, the first time ever Brazil won that title.
She also participated at the 2011 World Women's Handball Championship in Brazil and the 2012 Summer Olympics.
5 Military Intelligence Battalion is an Intelligence Corps Army Reserve unit in the British Army.
It is based in Scotland, with sub-units in Edinburgh, Gateshead and Leeds and detachments in Glasgow and Chesterfield.
It is partnered with 1 Military Intelligence Battalion, a Regular Army unit based in Catterick Garrison, North Yorkshire.
George Villiers, 4th Viscount Grandison, was an Anglo-Irish peer from the Villiers family.
He is known for being the maternal great-grandfather of Pitt the elder, prime minister of Great Britain from 1766 to 1768.
He was also the uncle of two royal mistresses, Barbara Villiers, and Elizabeth Hamilton, Countess of Orkney.
Euphaedra uganda is a butterfly in the family Nymphalidae.
It is found in Uganda and Tanzania.
Cutter was an architect and interior designer associated with work in New Jersey, Boston, New York City, the state of New York, and Alberta, Canada.
He is credited with the design of the National Register of Historic Places listed Saint John's Episcopal Church and Church of the Transfiguration.
He also designed the picturesque Gothic architecture St.
Pripiceni-Rzei is a commune in Rezina District, Moldova.
It is composed of two villages, Pripiceni-Curchi and Pripiceni-Rzei.
A white dwarf is a very dense type of star: in an Earth-sized volume, it packs a mass that is comparable to the Sun.
A white dwarf radiates light from residual heat and eventual crystallization, not from nuclear fusion.
Stars like the Sun, whose mass is not high enough to collapse into a neutron star or black hole, are expected to become white dwarf stars later in their evolution.
The nearest known white dwarf is Sirius B, at 8.6light years, the smaller component of the Sirius binary star.
A red giant is a luminous giant star of low or intermediate mass in a late phase of stellar evolution.
The outer atmosphere is inflated and tenuous, making the radius large and the surface temperature around 5,000K [K] or lower.
The appearance of the red giant is from yellow-white to reddish-orange, including the spectral types K and M, sometimes G, but also class S stars and most carbon stars.
In astronomy, the main sequence is a classification of stars which appear on plots of stellar color versus brightness as a continuous and distinctive band.
Stars spend the majority of their lives on the main sequence, during which core hydrogen burning is dominant.
These main-sequence stars, or sometimes interchangeably dwarf stars, are the most numerous true stars in the universe and include the Sun.
Color-magnitude plots are known as HertzsprungRussell diagrams after Ejnar Hertzsprung and Henry Norris Russell.
Stellar evolution is the process by which a star changes over the course of time.
Depending on the mass of the star, its lifetime can range from a few million years for the most massive to trillions of years for the least massive, which is considerably longer than the current age of the universe.
The table shows the lifetimes of stars as a function of their masses.
All stars are formed from collapsing clouds of gas and dust, often called nebulae or molecular clouds.
Over the course of millions of years, these protostars settle down into a state of equilibrium, becoming what is known as a main sequence star.
A protostar is a very young star that is still gathering mass from its parent molecular cloud.
It is the earliest phase in the process of stellar evolution.
For a low-mass star, it lasts about 500,000 years.
The phase begins when a molecular cloud fragment first collapses under the force of self-gravity and an opaque, pressure-supported core forms inside the collapsing fragment.
It ends when the infalling gas is depleted, leaving a pre-main-sequence star, which contracts to later become a main-sequence star at the onset of hydrogen fusion producing helium.
A planetary nebula is a type of emission nebula consisting of an expanding, glowing shell of ionized gas ejected from red giant stars late in their lives.
A globular cluster is a spheroidal conglomeration of stars that is bound together by gravity, with a higher concentration of stars towards its center.
It can contain anywhere from tens of thousands to many millions of member stars, all orbiting in a stable, compact formation.
Their name is derived from Latin globulus.
Globular clusters are occasionally known simply as "globulars".
An open cluster is a type of star cluster made of tens to a few thousand stars that were formed from the same giant molecular cloud and have roughly the same age.
More than 1,100 open clusters have been discovered within the Milky Way galaxy, and many more are thought to exist.
Each one is loosely bound by mutual gravitational attraction and becomes disrupted by close encounters with other clusters and clouds of gas as they orbit the Galactic Center.
This can result in a loss of cluster members through internal close encounters and a dispersion into the main body of the galaxy.
Open clusters generally survive for a few hundred million years, with the most massive ones surviving for a few billion years.
A dwarf planet is a small planetary-mass object that is in direct orbit around the Sun, massive enough to be gravitationally rounded, but insufficient to achieve orbital dominance like the eight classical planets of the Solar System.
The prototypical dwarf planet is Pluto, which for decades was regarded as a planet before the "dwarf" concept was adopted in 2006.
Many planetary geologists consider dwarf planets and planetary-mass moons to be planets, but since 2006 the IAU and many astronomers have excluded them from the roster of planets.
The Kuiper belt is a circumstellar disc in the outer Solar System, extending from the orbit of Neptune at 30 astronomical units (AU) to approximately 50AU from the Sun.
It is similar to the asteroid belt, but is far larger20times as wide and 20200times as massive.
Like the asteroid belt, it consists mainly of small bodies or remnants from when the Solar System formed.
While many asteroids are composed primarily of rock and metal, most Kuiper belt objects are composed largely of frozen volatiles, such as methane, ammonia, and water.
The Kuiper belt is home to most of the objects that astronomers generally accept as dwarf planets: Orcus, Pluto, Haumea, Quaoar, and Makemake.
The Oort cloud, sometimes called the pikOort cloud, is theorized to be a cloud of billions of icy planetesimals surrounding the Sun at distances ranging from 2,000 to 200,000 AU.
Its existence was proposed in 1950 by the Dutch astronomer Jan Oort, in whose honor the idea was later named.
Oort proposed that the bodies in this cloud replenish and keep constant the number of long-period comets entering the inner Solar Systemwhere they are eventually consumed and destroyed during close approaches to the Sun.
The asteroid belt is a torus-shaped region in the Solar System, centered on the Sun and roughly spanning the space between the orbits of the planets Jupiter and Mars.
It contains a great many solid, irregularly shaped bodies called asteroids or minor planets.
The identified objects are of many sizes, but much smaller than planets, and, on average, are about one million kilometers apart.
This asteroid belt is also called the main asteroid belt or main belt to distinguish it from other asteroid populations in the Solar System.
In physics, a redshift is an increase in the wavelength, or equivalently, a decrease in the frequency, of electromagnetic radiation.
The opposite change, a decrease in wavelength and increase in frequency and energy, is known as a blueshift.
The multiverse is the hypothetical set of all universes.
Together, these universes are presumed to comprise everything that exists: the entirety of space, time, matter, energy, information, and the physical laws and constants that describe them.
The different universes within the multiverse are called "parallel universes", "flat universes", "other universes", "alternate universes", "multiple universes", "plane universes", "parent and child universes", "many universes", or "many worlds".
One common assumption is that the multiverse is a "patchwork quilt of separate universes all bound by the same laws of physics."
In electrical engineering, a transformer is a passive component that transfers electrical energy from one electrical circuit to another circuit, or multiple circuits.
A varying current in any coil of the transformer produces a varying magnetic flux in the transformer's core, which induces a varying electromotive force (EMF) across any other coils wound around the same core.
Electrical energy can be transferred between separate coils without a metallic (conductive) connection between the two circuits.
Faraday's law of induction, discovered in 1831, describes the induced voltage effect in any coil due to a changing magnetic flux encircled by the coil.
This organic layer is situated between two electrodes; typically, at least one of these electrodes is transparent.
OLEDs are used to create digital displays in devices such as television screens, computer monitors, and portable systems such as smartphones and handheld game consoles.
A major area of research is the development of white OLED devices for use in solid-state lighting applications.
A touchscreen is a type of display that can detect touch input from a user to do a specific task.
It consists of both an input device and an output device.
The touch panel is typically layered on the top of the electronic visual display of a device.
Touchscreens are commonly found in smartphones, tablets, laptops, and other electronic devices.
The display is often an LCD, AMOLED or OLED display.
A sensor is often defined as a device that receives and responds to a signal or stimulus.
The stimulus is the quantity, property, or condition that is sensed and converted into electrical signal.
A microcontroller or microcontroller unit (MCU) is a small computer on a single integrated circuit.
A microcontroller contains one or more processor cores along with memory and programmable input/output peripherals.
Program memory in the form of NOR flash, OTP ROM, or ferroelectric RAM is also often included on the chip, as well as a small amount of RAM.
Microcontrollers are designed for embedded applications, in contrast to the microprocessors used in personal computers or other general-purpose applications consisting of various discrete chips.
Arduino is an Italian open-source hardware and software company, as well as a project and user community that designs and manufactures single-board microcontrollers and microcontroller kits for building digital and other kinds of devices.
Arduino boards are available commercially from the official website or through authorized distributors.
Raspberry Pi is a series of small single-board computers (SBCs) originally developed in the United Kingdom by the Raspberry Pi Foundation in collaboration with Broadcom.
To commercialize the product and support its growing demand, the Foundation established a commercial entity, now known as Raspberry Pi Holdings.
A field-programmable gate array (FPGA) is a type of configurable integrated circuit that can be repeatedly programmed after manufacturing.
FPGAs are a subset of logic devices referred to as programmable logic devices (PLDs).
They consist of a grid-connected array of programmable logic blocks that can be configured "in the field" to interconnect with other logic blocks to perform various digital functions.
An application-specific integrated circuit is an integrated circuit (IC) chip customized for a particular use, rather than intended for general-purpose use, such as a chip designed to run in a digital voice recorder or a high-efficiency video codec.
Application-specific standard product chips are intermediate between ASICs and industry standard integrated circuits like the 7400 series or the 4000 series.
ASIC chips are typically fabricated using metaloxidesemiconductor (MOS) technology, as MOS integrated circuit chips.
Plate tectonics is the scientific theory that Earth's lithosphere comprises a number of large tectonic plates, which have been slowly moving since 34 billion years ago.
The model builds on the concept of continental drift, an idea developed during the first decades of the 20th century.
Plate tectonics came to be accepted by geoscientists after seafloor spreading was validated in the mid- to late 1960s.
The processes that result in plates and shape Earth's crust are called tectonics.
An earthquake, also called a quake, tremor, or temblor, is the shaking of the Earth's surface resulting from a sudden release of energy in the lithosphere that creates seismic waves.
Earthquakes can range in intensity, from those so weak they cannot be felt, to those violent enough to propel objects and people into the air, damage critical infrastructure, and wreak destruction across entire cities.
The seismic activity of an area is the frequency, type, and size of earthquakes experienced over a particular time.
The seismicity at a particular location in the Earth is the average rate of seismic energy released per unit volume.
A volcano is a vent or fissure in the crust of a planetary-mass object that allows hot lava, volcanic ash, and gases to escape from a magma chamber below the surface.
On Earth, volcanoes are most often found where tectonic plates are diverging or converging, and because most of Earth's plate boundaries are underwater, most volcanoes are found underwater.
For example, a mid-ocean ridge, such as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, has volcanoes caused by divergent tectonic plates whereas the Pacific Ring of Fire has volcanoes caused by convergent tectonic plates.
Volcanoes resulting from divergent tectonic activity are usually non-explosive whereas those resulting from convergent tectonic activity cause violent eruptions.
Volcanoes can also form where there is stretching and thinning of the crust's plates, such as in the East African Rift, the Wells Gray-Clearwater volcanic field, and the Rio Grande rift in North America.
A tsunami is a series of waves in a water body caused by the displacement of a large volume of water, generally in an ocean or a large lake.
Earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and underwater explosions above or below water all have the potential to generate a tsunami.
Unlike normal ocean waves, which are generated by wind, or tides, which are in turn generated by the gravitational pull of the Moon and the Sun, a tsunami is generated by the displacement of water from a large event.
Though the fossil record is incomplete, numerous studies have demonstrated that there is enough information available to give a good understanding of the pattern of diversification of life on Earth.
In addition, the fossil record can fill gaps in our understanding of the sequence of evolution on earth, as demonstrated by the discovery of Tiktaalik in the arctic of Canada.
Paleontology or palaeontology is the scientific study of the life of the past, mainly but not exclusively through the study of fossils.
Paleontologists use fossils as a means to classify organisms, measure geologic time, and assess the interactions between prehistoric organisms and their natural environment.
While paleontological observations are known from at least the 6th century BC, the foundation of paleontology as a science dates back to the work of Georges Cuvier in 1796.
Cuvier demonstrated evidence for the concept of extinction and how the life of the past was not necessarily the same as that of the present.
An ice age is a period of time when the lower temperature of Earth's surface and atmosphere results in the presence or expansion of continental and polar ice sheets and alpine glaciers.
The term is applied in several different senses to very long and comparatively short periods of cooling.
Colder periods are called glacials or ice ages, and warmer periods are called interglacials.
A mantle is a layer inside a planetary body bounded below by a core and above by a crust.
Mantles are made of rock or ices, and are generally the largest and most massive layer of the planetary body.
Mantles are characteristic of planetary bodies that have undergone differentiation by density.
All terrestrial planets, half of the giant planets, specifically ice giants, a number of asteroids, and some planetary moons have mantles.
The internal structure of Earth is the spatial variation of chemical and physical properties in the solid Earth.
The primary structure is a series of layers: Its mechanical structure is of a rigid lithosphere, a semi-fluid asthenosphere, a rigid mesosphere, a liquid outer core, and a solid inner core.
Its chemical structure is of a silicate crust, a ferromagnesian mantle, and an iron-nickel core whose flowing upper portion generates the Earth's magnetic field.
Magma is the molten or semi-molten natural material from which all igneous rocks are formed.
Magma is found beneath the surface of the Earth, and evidence of magmatism has also been discovered on other terrestrial planets and some natural satellites.
Besides molten rock, magma may also contain suspended crystals and gas bubbles.
Lava is magma that has been expelled from the interior of a terrestrial planet or a moon onto its surface.
Lava may be erupted at a volcano or through a fracture in the crust, on land or underwater, usually at temperatures from 800 to 1,200C.
Lava may be erupted directly onto the land surface or onto the sea floor or it may be ejected into the atmosphere before falling back down.
The solid volcanic rock resulting from subsequent cooling of the molten material is often also called lava.
Present-day climate change includes both global warmingthe ongoing increase in global average temperatureand its wider effects on Earth's climate system.
Climate change in a broader sense also includes previous long-term changes to Earth's climate.
The modern-day rise in global temperatures is driven by human activities, especially fossil fuel burning since the Industrial Revolution.
These gases absorb some of the heat that the Earth radiates after it warms from sunlight, warming the lower atmosphere.
The greenhouse effect occurs when heat-trapping gases in a planet's atmosphere prevent the planet from losing heat to space, raising its surface temperature.
Surface heating can happen from an internal heat source or come from an external source, such as a host star.
In the case of Earth, the Sun emits shortwave radiation (sunlight) that passes through greenhouse gases to heat the Earth's surface.
In response, the Earth's surface emits longwave radiation that is mostly absorbed by greenhouse gases, reducing the rate at which the Earth can cool off.
The ozone layer or ozone shield is a region of Earth's stratosphere that absorbs most of the Sun's ultraviolet radiation.
It contains a high concentration of ozone (O3) in relation to other parts of the atmosphere, although still small in relation to other gases in the stratosphere.
The ozone layer peaks at 8 to 15 parts per million of ozone, while the average ozone concentration in Earth's atmosphere as a whole is about 0.3 parts per million.
The ozone layer is mainly found in the lower portion of the stratosphere, from approximately 15 to 35 kilometers (9 to 22mi) above Earth, although its thickness varies seasonally and geographically.
Desertification is a type of gradual land degradation of fertile land into arid desert due to a combination of natural processes and human activities.
Coral bleaching is the process where corals become white due to loss of symbiotic algae and photosynthetic pigments.
This loss of pigment can be caused by various stressors, such as changes in water temperature, light, salinity, or nutrients.
A bleached coral is under stress, more vulnerable to starvation and disease, and at risk of death.
The leading cause of coral bleaching is rising ocean temperatures due to climate change.
Take up of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere also has been acidifying the oceans and affects coral health.
Ocean acidification is the ongoing decrease in the pH of the Earth's ocean.
Between 1950 and 2020, the average pH of the ocean surface fell from approximately 8.15 to 8.05.
Carbon dioxide emissions from human activities are the primary cause of ocean acidification, with atmospheric carbon dioxide levels exceeding 422ppm.
CO2 from the atmosphere is absorbed by the oceans.
This chemical reaction produces carbonic acid which dissociates into a bicarbonate ion and a hydrogen ion.
A national park is a nature park designated for conservation purposes because of unparalleled national natural, historic, or cultural significance.
It is an area of natural, semi-natural, or developed land that is protected and owned by a government.
National parks are almost always accessible to the public.
Usually national parks are developed, owned and managed by national governments, though in some countries with federal or devolved forms of government, "national parks" may be the responsibility of subnational, regional, or local authorities.
A biome is a distinct geographical region with specific climate, vegetation, animal life, and an ecosystem.
It consists of a biological community that has formed in response to its physical environment and regional climate.
In 1935, Tansley added the climatic and soil aspects to the idea, calling it ecosystem.
The International Biological Program (196474) projects popularized the concept of biome.
Tropical rainforests are dense and warm rainforests with high rainfall typically found between 10 north and south of the Equator.
They are a subset of the tropical forest biome that occurs roughly within the 28 latitudes.
Tropical rainforests are a type of tropical moist broadleaf forest, that includes the more extensive seasonal tropical forests.
True rainforests usually occur in tropical rainforest climates where no dry season occurs; all months have an average precipitation of at least 60mm (2.4in).
Seasonal tropical forests with tropical monsoon or savanna climates are sometimes included in the broader definition.
In physical geography, a tundra is a type of biome where tree growth is hindered by frigid temperatures and short growing seasons.
There are three regions and associated types of tundra: Arctic, Alpine, and Antarctic.
A savanna or savannah is a mixed woodland-grassland biome and ecosystem characterised by the trees being sufficiently widely spaced so that the canopy does not close.
The open canopy allows sufficient light to reach the ground to support an unbroken herbaceous layer consisting primarily of grasses.
Four savanna forms exist; savanna woodland, where trees and shrubs form a light canopy; tree savanna, with scattered trees and shrubs; shrub savanna, with distributed shrubs; and grass savanna, where trees and shrubs are mostly nonexistent.
A wetland is a distinct semi-aquatic ecosystem whose groundcovers are flooded or saturated in water, either permanently, for years or decades, or only seasonally.
Flooding results in oxygen-poor (anoxic) processes taking place, especially in the soils.
Wetlands form a transitional zone between waterbodies and dry lands, and are different from other terrestrial or aquatic ecosystems due to their vegetation's roots having adapted to oxygen-poor waterlogged soils.
An estuary is a partially enclosed coastal body of brackish water where freshwater from rivers or streams meets and mixes with saltwater from the open sea.
Estuaries form transition zones between riverine and marine environments and are classified as ecotones, areas where different ecosystems overlap.
They are influenced by both marine processes and fluvial processes.
The mixing of seawater and freshwater provides high levels of nutrients both in the water column and in sediment, making estuaries among the most productive natural habitats in the world.
Successive dynasties expanded the wall system; the best-known sections were built by the Ming dynasty (13681644).
Further modifications were made during the reign of Domitian.
The three emperors who were patrons of the work are known as the Flavian dynasty, and the amphitheatre was named the Flavian Amphitheatre by later classicists and archaeologists for its association with their family name (Flavius).
The Parthenon is a former temple on the Athenian Acropolis, Greece, that was dedicated to the goddess Athena.
Its decorative sculptures are considered some of the high points of classical Greek art, and the Parthenon is considered an enduring symbol of ancient Greece, Western civilisation, and democracy.
The Eiffel Tower is a lattice tower on the Champ de Mars in Paris, France.
It is named after the engineer Gustave Eiffel, whose company designed and built the tower from 1887 to 1889.
The Empire State Building is a 102-story, supertall skyscraper in the Midtown South neighborhood of Manhattan, New York City, United States.
The building was designed in the Art Deco style by Shreve, Lamb & Harmon and constructed between 1930 and 1931.
Its name is derived from "Empire State", the nickname of New York state.
The building has a roof height of 1,250 feet (380m) and stands a total of 1,454 feet (443.2m) tall including its antenna.
The Burj Khalifa is a megatall skyscraper in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
Designed by Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, it is the world's tallest structure, with a total height of 829.8 m and a roof height of 828m (2,717ft).
It has also been the tallest building in the world since its topping out in 2009, surpassing Taipei 101, which had held the record since 2004.
The Golden Gate Bridge is a suspension bridge spanning the Golden Gate, the one-mile-wide (1.6km) strait connecting San Francisco Bay and the Pacific Ocean in California, United States.
The structure links San Franciscothe northern tip of the San Francisco Peninsulato Marin County, carrying both U.S.
Route 101 and California State Route 1 across the strait.
It also carries pedestrian and bicycle traffic, and is designated as part of U.S.
The Great Pyramid of Giza is the largest of the Egyptian pyramids and the most famous landmark of the Giza pyramid complex in Giza, Egypt.
It is the oldest of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, and the only wonder that has remained largely intact.
The Great Pyramid served as the tomb of Egyptian Pharaoh Khufu ("Cheops"), who ruled during the Fourth Dynasty of the Old Kingdom.
2600 BC over a period of about 26 years.
Inside these are free-standing trilithons: two bulkier vertical sarsens joined by a single lintel.
The whole monument, now in ruins, is aligned towards the sunrise on the summer solstice and sunset on the winter solstice.
Petra, originally known to its inhabitants as Raqmu, is an ancient city and archaeological site in southern Jordan.
Famous for its rock-cut architecture and water conduit systems, Petra is also called the "Rose City" because of the colour of the sandstone from which it is carved.
The city is one of the New 7 Wonders of the World and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Angkor Wat is noted for its monumental scale, extensive bas-reliefs, and architectural unity characteristics of Khmer architecture.
Unlike most Angkorian temples, it is oriented toward the west.
English is a West Germanic language of the Indo-European language family that emerged in early medieval England and has since become a global lingua franca.
The language is named after the Angles, one of the Germanic peoples who migrated to Britain after the end of Roman rule.
English is the most spoken language in the world, primarily due to the global influence of the former British Empire and the United States.
It is the most widely learned second language in the world, with more secondlanguage speakers than native speakers.
However, English is only the thirdmost spoken native language, after Mandarin Chinese and Spanish.
Spanish or Castilian is a Romance language of the Indo-European language family that evolved from the Vulgar Latin spoken on the Iberian Peninsula of Europe.
It originated in the Kingdom of Castile, a historical kingdom in north-central Spain.
Today, it is a global language with 519 million native speakers, mainly in the Americas and Spain, and about 636 million speakers total, including second-language speakers.
Spanish is the official language of 21 countries, as well as one of the six official languages of the United Nations.
Spanish is the world's second-most spoken native language after Mandarin Chinese; the world's fourth-most spoken language overall after English, Mandarin Chinese, and Hindustani (Hindi-Urdu); and the world's most widely spoken Romance language.
Mandarin is the largest branch of the Sinitic languages.
Mandarin varieties are natively spoken by 70 percent of all Chinese speakers, spread over a large geographical area that stretches from Yunnan in the southwest to Xinjiang in the northwest and Heilongjiang in the northeast.
Its spread is generally attributed to the overall greater ease of travel in the North China Plain compared to the more mountainous south, combined with the relatively recent spread of northern varieties to frontier areas.
Many varieties of Mandarin, such as those of the Southwest and the Lower Yangtze, are not mutually intelligible with the Beijing dialect.
Nevertheless, Mandarin as a group is often placed first in lists of languages by number of native speakers.
Modern Standard Hindi, commonly referred to as Hindi, is an Indo-Aryan language written in the Devanagari script.
It is an official language of the government of India, and is the lingua franca for most of the northern half of India.
Arabic is a Central Semitic language of the Afroasiatic language family spoken primarily in the Arab world.
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) assigns language codes to 32 varieties of Arabic, including its standard form of Literary Arabic, known as Modern Standard Arabic, which is derived from Classical Arabic.
This distinction is primarily made by Western linguists; Arabic speakers themselves generally do not distinguish between Modern Standard Arabic and Classical Arabic, but rather refer to both as al-arabiyyatu l-fu or simply al-fu ().
French is a Romance language of the Indo-European family.
Like all other Romance languages, French and its closest relativesthe langues d'ol, historically spoken in northern France and southern Belgiumdescended from the Vulgar Latin of the Roman Empire.
Over time, French largely supplanted these regional relatives.
Russian is an East Slavic language belonging to the Balto-Slavic branch of the Indo-European language family.
It is one of the four extant East Slavic languages, and is the native language of the Russian people.
Russian was the de facto official language of the former Soviet Union.
It has remained an official language of Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan, and is still commonly used as a lingua franca in Ukraine, Moldova, the Caucasus, Central Asia, and to a lesser extent in the Baltic states and Israel.
Portuguese is a Western Romance language of the Indo-European language family, written in the Latin script.
With approximately 267 million native speakers, it is the fifth-most spoken native language in the world, and the most widely spoken language in the Southern Hemisphere.
It is the official language of eight countries  Portugal, Brazil, Angola, Mozambique, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, So Tom and Prncipe, and Timor-Leste  and is co-official with other languages in Macau and Equatorial Guinea.
Japanese  is the principal language of the Japonic language family spoken by the Japanese people.
It has around 123 million speakers, primarily in Japan, the only country where it is the national language, and within the Japanese diaspora worldwide.
Korean is the native language of the Korean people, who make up the majority of the languages 81 million speakers.
It is the national language of both North Korea and South Korea.
In the south, the language is known as Hangugeo and in the north, it is known as Chosn.
Since the turn of the 21st century, Korean popular culture has spread around the world through globalization and cultural exports.
Korean uses the Hangul alphabet.
Hindu mythology refers to the collection of myths associated with Hinduism, derived from various Hindu texts and traditions.
These myths are found in sacred texts such as the Vedas, the Itihasas, and the Puranas.
They also appear in regional and ethnolinguistic texts, including the Bengali Mangal Kavya and the Tamil Periya Puranam and Divya Prabandham.
Additionally, Hindu myths are found in widely translated fables like the Panchatantra and the Hitopadesha, as well as in Southeast Asian texts influenced by Hindu traditions.
Japanese mythology is a collection of traditional stories, folktales, and beliefs that emerged in the islands of the Japanese archipelago.
Shinto traditions are the cornerstones of Japanese mythology.
The history of thousands of years of contact with Chinese and various Indian myths are also key influences in Japanese religious belief.
Zeus is the supreme deity of the Greek pantheon.
He is a sky and thunder god in ancient Greek religion and mythology, who rules as king of the gods on Mount Olympus.
Odin is a widely revered god in Norse mythology and Germanic paganism.
Most surviving information on Odin comes from Norse mythology, but he figures prominently in the recorded history of Northern Europe.
This includes the Roman Empire's partial occupation of Germania, the Migration Period and the Viking Age.
Consequently, Odin has hundreds of names and titles.
Several of these stem from the reconstructed Proto-Germanic theonym Wanaz, meaning "lord of frenzy" or "leader of the possessed", which may relate to the god's strong association with poetry.
Thor is a prominent god in Germanic paganism.
In Norse mythology, he is a hammer-wielding god associated with thunder, storms, strength, protection, fertility, and farmers.
Besides Old Norse rr, the deity occurs in Old English as Thunor, in Old Frisian as Thuner, in Old Saxon as Thunar, and in Old High German as Donar, all ultimately stemming from the Proto-Germanic theonym *un(a)raz, meaning 'Thunder'.
Athena or Athene, often given the epithet Pallas, is an ancient Greek goddess associated with wisdom, warfare, and handicraft who was later syncretised with the Roman goddess Minerva.
Athena was regarded as the patron and protectress of various cities across Greece, particularly the city of Athens, from which she most likely received her name.
Her major symbols include owls, olive trees, snakes, and the gorgoneion.
In art, she is generally depicted wearing a helmet and holding a spear.
Apollo is one of the Olympian deities in ancient Greek religion and mythology.
His numerous functions include healing, prophecy, music, poetry, and archery.
He is the son of Zeus and Leto, and the twin brother of Artemis, goddess of the hunt.
He is considered to be the most beautiful god and is represented as the ideal of the kouros.
Buddhism, also known as Buddhadharma and Dharmavinaya, is an Indian religion and philosophy based on teachings attributed to the Buddha, a ramaa and religious teacher who lived in the 6th or 5th century BCE.
It is the world's fourth-largest religion, with about 320 million followers, known as Buddhists, who comprise 4.1% of the global population.
Christianity is an Abrahamic monotheistic religion based on the Bible and the teachings of Jesus.
The Gospels state that Jesus is the Son of God and rose from the dead after his crucifixion, whose coming as the messiah (Christ) was prophesied in the Old Testament and chronicled in the New Testament.
It is the world's largest and most widespread religion with over 2.3billion followers, comprising around 28.8% of the world population.
Its adherents, known as Christians, are estimated to make up a majority of the population in 120 countries and territories.
Islam is an Abrahamic religion based on the Quran and the teachings of Muhammad.
The monotheistic religion has an estimated 2 billion worldwide adherents, called Muslims.
Islam is the world's second-largest religious population after Christianity.
The word Hindu is an exonym, and while Hinduism has been called the oldest surviving religion in the world, it is also described by the 19th century term Santana Dharma.
Vaidika Dharma and Arya Dharma are historical endonyms for Hinduism.
In economics, specifically general equilibrium theory, a perfect market, also known as an atomistic market, is defined by several idealizing conditions, collectively called perfect competition, or atomistic competition.
This equilibrium would be a Pareto optimum.
An interest rate is the amount of interest due per period, as a proportion of the amount lent, deposited, or borrowed.
Interest rate periods are ordinarily a year and are often annualized when not.
Alongside interest rates, three other variables determine total interest: principal sum, compounding frequency, and length of time.
A central bank, reserve bank, national bank, state bank, or monetary authority is a financial institution that manages the monetary policy of a country or monetary union.
In contrast to a commercial bank, a central bank possesses a monopoly on increasing the monetary base.
Central banks play a crucial role in macroeconomic forecasting, which is essential for guiding monetary policy decisions, especially during times of economic turbulence.
The Federal Reserve System is the central banking system of the United States.
It was created on December 23, 1913, with the enactment of the Federal Reserve Act, after a series of financial panics led to the desire for central control of the monetary system in order to alleviate financial crises.
Although an instrument of the U.S.
The World Trade Organization (WTO) is an intergovernmental organization that regulates and facilitates international trade.
Established on 1 January 1995, pursuant to the 1994 Marrakesh Agreement, it succeeded the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which was created in 1948.
As the world's largest international economic organization, the WTO has 166 members, representing over 98% of global trade and global GDP.
It is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) is an international financial institution and a specialized agency of the United Nations, headquartered in Washington, D.C.
The IMF acts as a lender of last resort to its members experiencing actual or potential balance of payments crises.
For example, population growth through mass immigration can raise consumption and demand for public services, thereby contributing to GDP growth.
The common measure of inflation is the inflation rate, the annualized percentage change in a general price index.
In economics, deflation is an increase in the real value of the monetary unit of account, as reflected in a decrease in cost of living, measurable by broad price indices.
In economics, a recession is a business cycle contraction that occurs when there is a period of broad decline in economic activity.
Recessions generally occur when there is a widespread drop in spending.
This may be triggered by various events, such as a financial crisis, an external trade shock, an adverse supply shock, the bursting of an economic bubble, or a large-scale anthropogenic or natural disaster.
There is no official definition of a recession, according to the International Monetary Fund.
An economic depression is a period of carried long-term economic downturn that is the result of lowered economic activity in one or more major national economies.
It is often understood in economics that an economic crisis and the following recession that may be termed an economic depression are part of economic cycles where the slowdown of the economy follows economic growth and vice versa.
It is a result of more severe economic problems or a downturn than a recession itself, which is a slowdown in economic activity over the course of the normal business cycle of a growing economy.
A startup or start-up is a company or project typically undertaken by an entrepreneur to seek, develop, and validate a scalable business model.
While entrepreneurship includes all new businesses including self-employment and businesses that do not intend to go public, startups are new businesses that intend to grow large beyond the solo-founder.
At the early stages, startups face significant uncertainty and high rates of failure.
However, a minority achieve notable success and influence, with some growing into unicorns, private companies valued at over US$1 billion.
Startups are typically characterized by an innovative stance, a potential for rapid growth, external funding, and vulnerability.
Venture capital firms or funds invest in these early-stage companies in exchange for equity, or an ownership stake.
Venture capitalists take on the risk of financing start-ups in the hopes that some of the companies they support will become successful.
Because startups face high uncertainty, VC investments have high rates of failure.
Start-ups are usually based on an innovative technology or business model and often come from high technology industries such as information technology (IT) or biotechnology.
Classical conditioning is a behavioral procedure in which a biologically potent stimulus is paired with a neutral stimulus.
The term classical conditioning refers to the process of an automatic, conditioned response that is paired with a specific stimulus.
It is essentially equivalent to a signal.
The DunningKruger effect is a cognitive bias that describes the systematic tendency of people with low ability in a specific area to give overly positive assessments of this ability.
The term may also refer to the tendency of high performers to underestimate their skills.
The effect was formalized and empirically studied by the psychologists David Dunning and Justin Kruger in 1999.
In popular culture, the DunningKruger effect is sometimes misunderstood as claiming that people with low intelligence are generally overconfident, instead of denoting specific overconfidence of people unskilled at particular areas.
An intelligence quotient (IQ) is a total score derived from a set of standardized tests or subtests designed to assess human intelligence.
Originally, IQ was a quotient obtained by dividing a person's estimated mental age, obtained by administering an intelligence test, by the person's chronological age.
The resulting fraction was multiplied by 100 to obtain the IQ score.
For modern IQ tests, the raw score is transformed to a normal distribution with mean 100 and standard deviation 15.
This results in approximately two-thirds of the population scoring between IQ 85 and IQ 115 and about 2 percent each above 130 and below 70.
Emotional intelligence (EI), also known as emotional quotient (EQ), is the ability to perceive, use, understand, manage, and handle emotions.
This includes emotional literacy.
Personality psychology is a branch of psychology that examines personality and its variation among individuals.
It aims to show how people are individually different due to psychological forces.
Its areas of focus include:Describing what personality is.
Documenting how personalities develop.
Explaining the mental processes of personality and how they affect functioning.
Maslow's hierarchy of needs is a conceptualization of the needs that motivate human behaviour, which was proposed by the American psychologist Abraham Maslow.
Attachment theory posits that infants need to form a close relationship with at least one primary caregiver to ensure their survival and to develop healthy social and emotional functioning.
It was first developed by psychiatrist and psychoanalyst John Bowlby (190790).
The theory proposes that secure attachments are formed when caregivers are sensitive and responsive in social interactions, and consistently available, particularly between the ages of six months and two years.
As children grow, they are thought to use these attachment figures as a secure base from which to explore the world and to return to for comfort.
A constitution, or supreme law, is the aggregate of fundamental principles or established precedents that constitute the legal basis of a polity, organization or other type of entity, and commonly determines how that entity is to be governed.
A bill of rights, sometimes called a declaration of rights or a charter of rights, is a list of the most important rights to the citizens of a country.
The purpose is to protect those rights against infringement from public officials and private citizens.
In most legal jurisdictions, a supreme court, also known as a court of last resort, apex court, high court of appeal, and court of final appeal, is the highest court within the hierarchy of courts.
Broadly speaking, the decisions of a supreme court are binding on all other courts in a nation and are not subject to further review by any other court.
Supreme courts typically function primarily as appellate courts, hearing appeals from decisions of lower trial courts, or from intermediate-level appellate courts.
A supreme court can also, in certain circumstances, act as a court of original jurisdiction.
International law, also known as public international law and the law of nations, is the set of rules, norms, legal customs and standards that states and other actors feel an obligation to, and generally do, obey in their mutual relations.
In international relations, actors are simply the individuals and collective entities, such as states, international organizations, and non-state groups, which can make behavioral choices, whether lawful or unlawful.
Rules are formal, typically written expectations that outline required behavior, while norms are informal, often unwritten guidelines about appropriate behavior that are shaped by custom and social practice.
It establishes norms for states across a broad range of domains, including war and diplomacy, economic relations, and human rights.
Criminal law is the body of law that relates to crime.
It proscribes conduct perceived as threatening, harmful, or otherwise endangering to the property, health, safety, and welfare of people, including oneself.
Most criminal law is established by statute, which is to say that the laws are enacted by a legislature.
Criminal law includes the punishment and rehabilitation of persons who violate such laws.
Civil law is a legal system rooted in the Roman Empire and was comprehensively codified and disseminated starting in the 19th century, most notably with France's Napoleonic Code (1804) and Germany's Brgerliches Gesetzbuch (1900).
Unlike common law systems, which rely heavily on judicial precedent, civil law systems are characterized by their reliance on legal codes that function as the primary source of law.
Today, civil law is the world's most common legal system, practiced in about 150 countries.
A patent is a type of intellectual property that gives its owner the legal right to exclude others from making, using, or selling an invention for a limited period of time, in exchange for publishing an enabling disclosure of the invention.
It offers a bargain between society and inventor: for a limited period of exclusivity, the inventor agrees to make the invention public rather than to keep it secret.
In most countries, patent rights fall under private law and the patent holder must sue someone infringing the patent in order to enforce their rights.
Rail transport is a means of transport using wheeled vehicles running on tracks, which usually consist of two parallel steel rails.
Rail transport is one of the two primary means of land transport, next to road transport.
It is used for about 8% of passenger and freight transport globally, thanks to its energy efficiency and potentially high speed.
Additionally, the track spreads the weight of the train which means larger amounts can be carried than with trucks on roads.
An electric locomotive is a type of locomotive powered by electricity from overhead lines, a third rail or on-board energy storage such as a battery or a supercapacitor.
A steam locomotive is a type of locomotive that provides the force to move itself and other vehicles by means of the expansion of steam.
It is fuelled by burning combustible material to heat water in the locomotive's boiler to the point where it becomes gaseous and its volume increases 1,600 to 1,700 times.
Functionally, it is a self-propelled steam engine on wheels.
A cargo ship or freighter is a merchant ship designed to transport goods, commodities, and materials across seas and oceans to help others, or to ship to stores.
These ships form the backbone of international trade, carrying the majority of global freight by volume.
Cargo ships vary widely in size and configuration, ranging from small coastal vessels to massive ocean-going carriers, and are typically specialized for particular types of cargo, such as containers, bulk goods, or liquids.
Modern cargo ships are constructed from welded steel and equipped with loading mechanisms such as cranes or gantries, however, old ones were wood, other than that.
They operate under complex logistical networks and international regulations, playing a critical role in the global economy and maritime infrastructure.
A container ship is a cargo ship that carries all of its load in truck-size intermodal containers, in a technique called containerization.
Container ships are a common means of commercial intermodal freight transport and now carry most seagoing non-bulk cargo.
An oil tanker, also known as a petroleum tanker, is a ship designed for the bulk transport of oil or its products.
There are two basic types of oil tankers: crude tankers and product tankers.
Crude tankers move large quantities of unrefined crude oil from its point of extraction to refineries.
Product tankers, generally much smaller, are designed to move refined products from refineries to points near consuming markets.
An aircraft carrier is a warship designed to carry, launch, recover and support aircraft at sea, equipped with a full-length flight deck and hangar facilities that allow it to serve as a mobile, seagoing airbase.
Typically it is the capital ship of a fleet, as it allows a naval force to project seaborne air power far from national territory without depending on local airfields for the staging of aircraft operations.
While heavier fixed-wing aircraft such as airlifters, gunships and bombers have been launched from aircraft carriers, these aircraft do not often land on a carrier due to flight deck limitations.
A nuclear submarine is a submarine powered by a nuclear reactor, but not necessarily nuclear-armed.
A jet engine is a type of reaction engine, discharging a fast-moving jet of heated gas that generates thrust by jet propulsion.
While this broad definition may include rocket, water jet, and hybrid propulsion, the term jet engine typically refers to an internal combustion air-breathing jet engine such as a turbojet, turbofan, ramjet, pulse jet, or scramjet.
In general, jet engines are internal combustion engines.
A  propeller is a type of propulsor with a rotating hub and radiating blades that are set at a pitch to form a helical spiral which exerts linear thrust upon a working fluid such as water or air when rotated.
Propellers are used to pump fluid through a pipe or duct, or to create thrust to propel a boat through water or an aircraft through air.
A parachute is a device designed to slow an object's descent through an atmosphere by creating drag or aerodynamic lift.
It is primarily used to safely support people exiting aircraft at height, but also serves various purposes like slowing cargo, aiding in space capsule recovery on Earth, landing spacecraft on other planets, and stabilizing vehicles or objects.
Modern parachutes are typically made from durable fabrics like nylon and come in various shapes, such as dome-shaped, rectangular, and inverted domes, depending on their specific function.
A hot air balloon is a lighter-than-air aircraft consisting of a bag, called an envelope, which contains heated air.
Suspended beneath is a gondola or wicker basket, which carries passengers and a source of heat, in most cases an open flame caused by burning liquid propane.
The heated air inside the envelope makes it buoyant, since it has a lower density than the colder air outside the envelope.
As with all aircraft, hot air balloons cannot fly beyond the atmosphere.
The envelope does not have to be sealed at the bottom, since the air inside the envelope is at about the same pressure as the surrounding air.
A nuclear weapon is an explosive device that derives its destructive force from nuclear reactions, either nuclear fission or a combination of fission and nuclear fusion reactions, producing a nuclear explosion.
Both bomb types release large quantities of energy from relatively small amounts of matter.
Nine sovereign states are believed to possess nuclear weapons as of 2026: the United States, Russia, the United Kingdom, France, China, India, Pakistan, North Korea and Israel.
Polyester is a category of polymers that contain one or two ester linkages in every repeat unit of their main chain.
As a specific material, it most commonly refers to a type called polyethylene terephthalate (PET).
Polyesters include some naturally occurring chemicals, such as those found in plants and insects.
Natural polyesters and a few synthetic ones are biodegradable, but most synthetic polyesters are not.
Synthetic polyesters are used extensively in clothing.
In mathematics, a matrix is a rectangular array of numbers or other mathematical objects with elements or entries arranged in rows and columns, usually satisfying certain properties of addition and multiplication.
In mathematics, a series is, roughly speaking, an addition of infinitely many terms, one after the other.
The study of series is a major part of calculus and its generalization, mathematical analysis.
Series are used in most areas of mathematics, even for studying finite structures in combinatorics through generating functions.
The mathematical properties of infinite series make them widely applicable in other quantitative disciplines such as physics, computer science, statistics and finance.
In mathematics, a sequence is a collection of objects possibly with repetition, that come in a specified order.
Like a set, it contains members.
Unlike a set, the same elements can appear multiple times at different positions in a sequence, and unlike a set, the order does matter.
The notion of a sequence can be generalized to an indexed family, defined as a function from an arbitrary index set.
Existentialism is a family of philosophical views and inquiry that explore the human individual's struggle to lead an authentic life despite the apparent absurdity or incomprehensibility of existence.
In examining meaning, purpose, and value, existentialist thought often includes concepts such as existential crises, angst, courage, and freedom.
Nihilism is a family of philosophical views that reject the existence of any objectively meaningful purpose, moral value, truth, or knowledge.
Nihilistic views span several branches of philosophy, including ethics, value theory, epistemology, and metaphysics.
Nihilism is also described as a broad cultural phenomenon or historical movement that pervades modernity in the Western world.
Stoicism is a philosophical movement and practical guide to living, emphasizing daily self-discipline and moral improvement, which originated in the Hellenistic period of ancient Greece and proliferated well into the Roman Imperial period.
The ancient Stoics believed that the universe operated according to reason, or logos, providing a unified account of the world, constructed from ideals of rational discourse, monistic physics, and naturalistic ethics.
These ideals constitute virtue, which is necessary for the Stoic goal of 'living a well-reasoned life'.
Utilitarianism is a family of theories in normative ethics that prescribe actions that maximize happiness and well-being for the affected individuals.
In other words, utilitarian ideas encourage actions that lead to the greatest good for the greatest number.
Although different varieties of utilitarianism admit different characterizations, the basic idea that underpins them all is, in some sense, to maximize utility, which is often defined in terms of well-being or related concepts.
For instance, Jeremy Bentham, the founder of utilitarianism, described utility as the capacity of actions or objects to produce benefits, such as pleasure, happiness, and good, or to prevent harm, such as pain and unhappiness, to those affected.
It is sometimes described as duty-, obligation-, or rule-based ethics.
Deontological ethics is commonly contrasted to utilitarianism and other consequentialist theories, virtue ethics, and pragmatic ethics.
In the deontological approach, the inherent rightfulness of actions is considered more important than their consequences.
In philosophy, empiricism is an epistemological view which holds that true knowledge or justification comes either only or primarily from sensory experience and empirical evidence.
It is one of several competing views within epistemology, along with rationalism and skepticism.
Empiricists argue that empiricism is a more reliable method of finding the truth than relying purely on logical reasoning, because humans have cognitive biases and limitations which lead to errors of judgement.
More formally, rationalism is defined as a methodology or a theory "in which the criterion of truth is not sensory but intellectual and deductive".
Pragmatism is a philosophical tradition that views language and thought as tools for prediction, problem solving, and action, rather than describing, representing, or mirroring reality.
Pragmatists contend that most philosophical topicssuch as the nature of knowledge, language, concepts, meaning, belief, and scienceare best viewed in terms of their practical uses and successes.
Phenomenology is a philosophical study and movement largely associated with the early 20th century that seeks to objectively investigate the nature of subjective, conscious experience.
It attempts to describe the universal features of consciousness while avoiding assumptions about the external world, aiming to describe phenomena as they appear, and to explore the meaning and significance of lived experience.
In food processing, pasteurization (-isation) is a process of food preservation in which packaged foods are treated with mild heat, usually to less than 100C (212F), to eliminate pathogens and extend shelf life.
Pasteurization either destroys or deactivates microorganisms and enzymes that contribute to food spoilage or the risk of disease, including vegetative bacteria, but most bacterial spores survive the process.
Barbecue or barbeque is a term used with regional and national variations to describe various cooking methods, employing live fire and smoke to cook food.
Chinese cuisine comprises cuisines originating from China, that varies with the country's large population and geographic diversity, as well as from Chinese people from other parts of the world.
Due to the Chinese diaspora and the historical power of the country, Chinese cuisine has profoundly influenced other cuisines in Asia and beyond, with modifications made to cater to local palates.
Chinese food staples like rice, soy sauce, noodles, tea, chili oil, and tofu, and utensils such as chopsticks and the wok, can now be found worldwide.
Japanese cuisine encompasses the regional and traditional foods of Japan, which have developed through centuries of political, economic, and social changes.
The traditional cuisine of Japan is based on rice with miso soup and other dishes with an emphasis on seasonal ingredients.
Side dishes often consist of fish, pickled vegetables, tamagoyaki, and vegetables cooked in broth.
Common seafood is often grilled, but it is also sometimes served raw as sashimi or as sushi.
Seafood and vegetables are also deep-fried in a light batter, as tempura.
A skeleton is the structural frame that supports the body of most animals.
Muscle is a specialised soft tissue, one of the four basic types of animal tissues.
There are three types of muscle tissues in vertebrates: skeletal muscle tissue, cardiac muscle tissue, and smooth muscle tissue.
Muscle tissue gives skeletal muscles the ability to contract and relax.
Muscle tissue contains special contractile proteins called actin and myosin which interact to cause movement.
Among many other muscle proteins present are two regulatory proteins, troponin and tropomyosin.
Skin is the layer of usually soft, flexible outer tissue covering the body of a vertebrate animal, with three main functions: protection, regulation, and sensation.
An eye is a sensory organ that allows an organism to perceive visual information.
It detects light and converts it into electro-chemical impulses in neurons (neurones).
It is part of an organism's visual system.
In vertebrates, an ear is the organ that enables hearing and body balance using the vestibular system.
In humans, the ear is described as having three parts: the outer ear, the middle ear and the inner ear.
The outer ear consists of the auricle, the visible outer part, and the ear canal.
The middle ear includes the tympanic cavity and the three ossicles.
A nose is a sensory organ and respiratory structure in vertebrates.
It consists of a nasal cavity inside the head, and an external nose on the face.
The external nose houses the nostrils, or nares, a pair of tubes providing airflow through the nose for respiration.
Where the nostrils pass through the nasal cavity they widen, are known as nasal fossae, and contain turbinates and olfactory mucosa.
The nasal cavity also connects to the paranasal sinuses.
The tongue is a muscular organ in the mouth of a typical tetrapod.
It manipulates food for chewing and swallowing as part of the digestive process and is the primary organ of taste.
The tongue's upper surface (dorsum) is covered by taste buds housed in numerous lingual papillae.
It is sensitive and kept moist by saliva and is richly supplied with nerves and blood vessels.
The tongue also serves as a natural means of cleaning the teeth.
A tooth is a hard, calcified structure found in the jaws of many vertebrates and used to break down food.
Some animals, particularly carnivores and omnivores, also use teeth to help with capturing or wounding prey, tearing food, for defensive purposes, to intimidate other animals often including their own, or to carry prey or their young.
The roots of teeth are covered by gums.
Teeth are not made of bone, but rather of multiple tissues of varying density and hardness that originate from the outermost embryonic germ layer, the ectoderm.
The stomach is a muscular, hollow organ in the upper gastrointestinal tract of humans and many other animals, including several invertebrates.
The Ancient Greek name for the stomach is gaster which is used as gastric in medical terms related to the stomach.
The stomach has a dilated structure and functions as a vital organ in the digestive system.
The stomach is involved in the gastric phase of digestion, following the cephalic phase in which the sight and smell of food and the act of chewing are stimuli.
In the stomach a chemical breakdown of food takes place by means of secreted digestive enzymes and gastric acid.
The gastrointestinal tract is the tract or passageway of the digestive system that leads from the mouth to the anus.
The tract is one of the largest of the body's systems.
The GI tract contains all the major organs of the digestive system, in humans and other animals, including the esophagus, stomach, and intestines.
Food taken in through the mouth is digested to extract nutrients and absorb energy, and the waste expelled at the anus as feces.
Gastrointestinal is an adjective meaning of or pertaining to the stomach and intestines.
Anemia is a blood disorder in which the blood has a reduced ability to carry oxygen.
This can be due to a lower than normal number of red blood cells, a reduction in the amount of hemoglobin available for oxygen transport, or abnormalities in hemoglobin that impair its function.
Appendicitis is inflammation of the appendix.
Symptoms commonly include right lower abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, fever and decreased appetite.
However, approximately 40% of people do not have these typical symptoms.
Severe complications of a ruptured appendix include widespread, painful inflammation of the inner lining of the abdominal wall and sepsis.
Insomnia, also known as sleeplessness, is a sleep disorder causing difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep for as long as desired.
Insomnia is typically followed by daytime sleepiness, low energy, irritability, and a depressed mood.
It may result in an increased risk of accidents as well as problems focusing and learning.
Insomnia can be short-term, lasting for days or weeks, or long-term, lasting more than a month.
The concept of the word insomnia has two distinct possibilities: insomnia disorder or insomnia symptoms.
Meningitis is acute or chronic inflammation of the protective membranes covering the brain and spinal cord, collectively called the meninges.
The most common symptoms are fever, intense headache, vomiting, neck stiffness, and occasionally photophobia.
Other symptoms include confusion or altered consciousness, nausea, and an inability to tolerate loud noises.
Young children often exhibit only nonspecific symptoms, such as irritability, drowsiness, or poor feeding.
A non-blanching rash may also be present.
Scurvy or scorbutus is a deficiency disease resulting from a lack of vitamin C.
Early symptoms of deficiency include weakness, fatigue, and sore arms and legs.
Without treatment, decreased red blood cells, gum disease, changes to hair, and bleeding from the skin may occur.
As scurvy worsens, there can be poor wound healing, personality changes, and finally death from infection or bleeding.
Willows, also called sallows and osiers, of the genus Salix, comprise around 350 species of typically deciduous trees and shrubs.
They are primarily found on moist soils in cold and temperate regions.
Eucalyptus is a genus of more than 700 species of flowering plants in the family Myrtaceae.
Most species of Eucalyptus are trees, often mallees, and a few are shrubs.
Along with several other genera in the tribe Eucalypteae, including Corymbia and Angophora, they are commonly known as eucalypts or "gum trees".
Species of Eucalyptus have bark that is either smooth, fibrous, hard, or stringy and leaves that have oil glands.
The sepals and petals are fused to form a "cap" or operculum over the stamens, hence the name from Greek e 'well' and kalupts 'covered'.
A cactus is a member of the plant family Cactaceae, a family of the order Caryophyllales comprising about 127 genera with some 1,750 known species.
The word cactus derives, through Latin, from the Ancient Greek word  (kktos), a name originally used by Theophrastus for a spiny plant whose identity is now not certain.
Cacti occur in a wide range of shapes and sizes.
They are native to the Americas, ranging from Patagonia in the south to parts of western Canada in the north, with the exception of Rhipsalis baccifera, which is also found in Africa and Sri Lanka.
Cacti are adapted to live in very dry environments, including the Atacama Desert, one of the driest places on Earth.
Ferns are a group of vascular plants that reproduce via spores and have neither seeds nor flowers.
They differ from non-vascular plants by having specialized transport bundles that conduct water and nutrients from and to the roots, as well as life cycles in which the branched sporophyte is the dominant phase.
Mosses are small, non-vascular flowerless plants in the taxonomic division Bryophyta sensu stricto.
Bryophyta may also refer to the parent group, bryophytes, which comprises liverworts, mosses, and hornworts.
Mosses typically form dense green clumps or mats, often in damp or shady locations.
The individual plants are usually composed of simple leaves that are generally only one cell thick, attached to a stem that may be branched or unbranched and has only a limited role in conducting water and nutrients.
Although some species have conducting tissues, these are generally poorly developed and structurally different from similar tissue found in vascular plants.
Algae are any of a large and diverse group of photosynthetic organisms.
It excludes the land plants (embryophytes).
Such organisms range from microscopic unicellular microalgae to seaweeds, multicellular macroalgae which may grow up to 50 metres (160ft) in length.
Most algae are aquatic, and some form cohesive colonies.
Freshwater algae include Charophyta such as the filamentous Spirogyra and the grasslike stoneworts.
Seaweed, or macroalgae, refers to thousands of species of macroscopic, multicellular, marine algae.
The term includes some types of Rhodophyta (red), Phaeophyta (brown) and Chlorophyta (green) macroalgae.
Tulips are spring-blooming perennial herbaceous bulbiferous geophytes in the Tulipa genus.
Their flowers are usually large, showy, and brightly coloured, generally red, orange, pink, yellow, or white.
They often have a different coloured blotch at the base of the tepals, internally.
Because of a degree of variability within the populations and a long history of cultivation, classification has been complex and controversial.
The tulip is a member of the lily family, Liliaceae, along with 14 other genera, where it is most closely related to Amana, Erythronium, and Gagea in the tribe Lilieae.
The common sunflower is a large annual forb in the daisy family Asteraceae.
The domesticated form of common sunflower is harvested for its edible seeds, which come in two types: oil and confectionary seeds.
Oilseed sunflowers are widely grown globally and represent the fourth most used vegetable oil in the world.
They also are used widely as bird food or as food for livestock.
In contrast, confectionary sunflower seeds are often eaten as a snack food or in baking.
Lilium is a genus of herbaceous flowering plants growing from bulbs, all with large and often prominent flowers.
Lilies are a group of flowering plants which are important in culture and literature in much of the world.
Most species are native to the Northern Hemisphere and their range is temperate climates and extends into the subtropics.
Many other plants have "lily" in their common names, but do not belong to the same genus and are therefore not true lilies.
True lilies are known to be highly toxic to cats.
Daisy, Daisies or DAISY may refer to:
Viola, commonly known as the violets, is a genus of flowering plants in the family Violaceae.
It is the largest genus in the family, containing over 680 species.
Most species are found in the temperate Northern Hemisphere; however, some are also found in widely divergent areas such as Hawaii, Australasia, and the Andes.
Diamond is a mineral form of the element carbon with its atoms arranged in a crystal structure called diamond cubic.
Diamond is a tasteless, odorless, strong, brittle solid, a poor conductor of electricity, colorless in pure form, and insoluble in water.
Another solid form of carbon known as graphite is the chemically stable form of carbon at room temperature and pressure, but diamond is metastable and converts to it at a negligible rate under those conditions.
Ruby is a pinkish-red to blood-red-colored gemstone, a variety of the mineral corundum, consisting of aluminium oxide (-Al2O3).
Ruby is one of the most popular traditional jewelry gems and is very durable.
Other varieties of gem-quality corundum are called sapphires, and rubies are also sometimes referred to as "red sapphires".
Emerald is a gemstone and a variety of the mineral beryl (Be3Al2(SiO3)6) colored green by trace amounts of chromium or sometimes vanadium.
Beryl has a hardness of 7.58 on the Mohs scale.
Most emeralds have many inclusions, so their toughness is classified as poor.
Emerald is a cyclosilicate.
It occurs mainly in association with quartz, muscovite, albite, schorl, microcline, fluorite, smoky quartz and elbaite.
Sapphire is a precious gemstone, a variety of the mineral corundum, consisting of aluminium oxide (-Al2O3) with trace amounts of elements such as iron, titanium, cobalt, lead, chromium, vanadium, magnesium, boron, and silicon.
The name sapphire is derived from the Latin word sapphirus, itself from the Greek word sappheiros (, itself from a Semitic origin), which referred to lapis lazuli.
Sapphire with colors other than its typical blue is referred to as "fancy sapphire", and can be in yellow, purple, orange, and green colors; "parti sapphires" show two or more colors.
Red corundum stones also occur, but are called rubies rather than sapphires.
Pink-colored corundum may be classified either as ruby or sapphire depending on the locale.
A truck or lorry is a motor vehicle designed to transport freight, carry specialized payloads, or perform other utilitarian work.
Trucks vary greatly in size, power, and configuration, but the vast majority feature body-on-frame construction, with a cabin that is independent of the payload portion of the vehicle.
Smaller varieties may be mechanically similar to some automobiles.
Commercial trucks can be very large and powerful and may be configured to be mounted with specialized equipment, such as in the case of refuse trucks, fire trucks, concrete mixers, and suction excavators.
In American English, a commercial vehicle without a trailer or other articulation is formally a "straight truck" while one designed specifically to pull a trailer is not a truck but a "tractor".
A chair ( ) is a type of seat, typically designed for one person and consisting of one or more legs, a flat or slightly angled seat, and a back-rest.
It may be made of wood, metal, or synthetic materials, and may be padded or upholstered in various colors and fabrics.
A curtain is a piece of cloth or other material intended to block or obscure light, air drafts, or water.
Pliers are a hand tool used to hold objects firmly, possibly developed from tongs used to handle hot metal in Bronze Age Europe.
They are also useful for bending and physically compressing a wide range of materials.
Generally, pliers consist of a pair of metal first-class levers joined at a fulcrum positioned closer to one end of the levers, creating short jaws on one side of the fulcrum, and longer handles on the other side.
This arrangement creates a mechanical advantage, allowing the force of the grip strength to be amplified and focused on an object with precision.
The jaws can also be used to manipulate objects too small or unwieldy to be manipulated with the fingers.
A saw is a tool consisting of a tough blade, wire, or chain with a hard toothed edge used to cut through material.
Various terms are used to describe toothed and abrasive saws.
A drill is a tool used for making round holes or driving fasteners.
It is fitted with a drill bit for making holes, or a screwdriver bit for securing fasteners.
Historically, they were powered by hand, and later mains power, but cordless battery-powered drills are proliferating due to increased efficiency and ease of use.
A chisel is a hand tool with a characteristic wedge-shaped cutting edge on the end of its blade.
A chisel is useful for carving or cutting a hard material such as wood, stone, or metal.
Sandpaper, also known as coated abrasive or emery paper, is a type of material that consists of sheets of paper or cloth with an abrasive substance (grit) glued to one face.
A level is an optical instrument used to establish or verify points in the same horizontal plane in a process known as levelling.
It is used in conjunction with a levelling staff to establish the relative height or levels of objects or marks.
It is widely used in surveying and construction to measure height differences and to transfer, measure, and set heights of known objects or marks.
A tape measure or measuring tape is a long, flexible ruler used to measure length or distance.
It usually consists of a ribbon of cloth, plastic, fibreglass, or metal strip with linear measurement markings.
A microscope is a laboratory instrument used to examine objects that are too small to be seen by the naked eye.
Microscopy is the science of investigating small objects and structures using a microscope.
Microscopic means being invisible to the eye unless aided by a microscope.
A telescope is a device used to observe distant objects by their emission, absorption, or reflection of electromagnetic radiation.
Originally, it was an optical instrument using lenses, curved mirrors, or a combination of both to observe distant objects  an optical telescope.
Nowadays, the word "telescope" is defined as a wide range of instruments capable of detecting different regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, and in some cases other types of detectors.
A thermometer is a device that measures temperature or temperature gradient.
A thermometer has two important elements: (1) a temperature sensor in which some change occurs with a change in temperature; and (2) some means of converting this change into a numerical value.
Thermometers are widely used in technology and industry to monitor processes, in meteorology, in medicine, and in scientific research.
A diplomatic mission or foreign mission is a group of people from a state or organization present in another state to represent the sending state or organization officially in the receiving or host state.
In practice, the phrase usually denotes an embassy or high commission, which is the main office of a country's diplomatic representatives to another country; it is usually, but not necessarily, based in the receiving state's capital city.
They are a critical part of modern economic production, with the majority of the world's goods being created or processed within factories.
An Atlantic hurricane is a type of tropical cyclone that forms in the Atlantic Ocean primarily between June and November.
These storms are continuously rotating around a low pressure center, which causes stormy weather across a large area, which is not limited to just the eye of the storm.
They are organized systems of clouds and thunderstorms that originate over tropical or subtropical waters and have closed low-level circulation.
A tornado, also known as a twister, is a rapidly rotating column of air that extends vertically from the surface of the Earth to the base of a cumulonimbus or cumulus cloud.
Tornadoes are often visible in the form of a condensation funnel originating from the cloud base, with a cloud of rotating debris and dust close to the ground.
Most tornadoes have wind speeds less than 180 kilometers per hour, are about 80 meters across, and travel several kilometers before dissipating.
The most extreme tornadoes can attain wind speeds of more than 480 kilometers per hour (300mph), can be more than 3 kilometers (2mi) in diameter, and can stay on the ground for more than 100km (62mi).
A typhoon is a tropical cyclone that develops between 180 and 100E in the Northern Hemisphere and which produces sustained hurricane-force winds of at least 119km/h (74mph).
This region is referred to as the Northwestern Pacific Basin, accounting for almost one third of the world's tropical cyclones.
For organizational purposes, the northern Pacific Ocean is divided into three regions: the eastern, central, and western.
The Regional Specialized Meteorological Center (RSMC) for tropical cyclone forecasts is in Japan, with other tropical cyclone warning centres for the northwest Pacific in Hawaii, the Philippines, and Hong Kong.
Although the RSMC names each system, the main name list itself is coordinated among 18 countries that have territories threatened by typhoons each year.
A blizzard is a severe snowstorm characterized by strong sustained winds and low visibility, lasting for a prolonged period of timetypically at least three or four hours.
A ground blizzard is a weather condition where snow that has already fallen is being blown by wind.
Blizzards can have an immense size and usually stretch to hundreds or thousands of kilometres.
Hail is a form of solid atmospheric precipitation.
It is distinct from ice pellets, though the two are often confused.
It consists of balls or irregular lumps of ice, each of which is called a hailstone.
Ice pellets generally fall in cold weather, while hail growth is greatly inhibited during low surface temperatures.
A drought is a period of drier-than-normal conditions.
A drought can last for days, months or years.
Drought often has large impacts on the ecosystems and agriculture of affected regions, and causes harm to the local economy.
Annual dry seasons in the tropics significantly increase the chances of a drought developing, with subsequent increased wildfire risks.
Heat waves can significantly worsen drought conditions by increasing evapotranspiration.
A thunderstorm, also known as an electrical storm or a lightning storm, is a storm characterized by the presence of lightning and thunder.
Relatively weak thunderstorms are sometimes called thundershowers.
Thunderstorms occur in cumulonimbus clouds.
They are usually accompanied by strong winds and often produce heavy rain and sometimes snow, sleet, or hail, but some thunderstorms can produce little or no precipitation at all.
Thunderstorms may line up in a series or become a rainband, known as a squall line.
Lightning is a natural phenomenon consisting of electrostatic discharges occurring through the atmosphere between two electrically charged regions.
One or both regions are within the atmosphere, with the second region sometimes occurring on the ground.
Following the lightning, the regions become partially or wholly electrically neutralized.
A rainbow is an optical phenomenon caused by refraction, internal reflection and dispersion of light in water droplets resulting in a continuous spectrum of light appearing in the sky.
The rainbow takes the form of a multicoloured circular arc.
Rainbows caused by sunlight always appear in the section of sky directly opposite the sun.
Rainbows can be caused by many forms of airborne water.
These include not only rain, but also mist, spray, and airborne dew.
An aurora is a natural light display in Earth's upper atmosphere caused by charged particles from the Sun colliding with atoms in the atmosphere.
These collisions excite oxygen and nitrogen, which then emit light of different colors such as green, red, and purple.
When observed in high-latitude regions they are called polar lights and aurora polaris.
In the Arctic they are called the northern lights or aurora borealis; in the Antarctic, the term southern lights or aurora australis is used.
Auroras display dynamic patterns of radiant light that appear as curtains, rays, spirals or dynamic flickers covering the entire sky.
Nostalgia is a sentimental view of the past, typically for a period or place with happy personal associations.
It is often described as a sort of sad pleasure, in which a person longs for a past, whether real or romanticized, that cannot be recovered.
It can also refer to a type of homesickness.
Rhythm and blues, frequently abbreviated as R&B or R'n'B, is a genre of popular music that originated within African American communities in the 1940s.
The term was originally used by record companies to describe recordings marketed predominantly to African Americans, at a time when "rocking, jazz based music...
[with a] heavy, insistent beat" was starting to become more popular.
In the commercial rhythm and blues music typical of the 1950s through the 1970s, the bands usually consisted of a piano, one or two guitars, bass, drums, one or more saxophones, and sometimes background vocalists.
R&B lyrical themes often encapsulate the African American history and experience of pain and the quest for freedom and joy, as well as triumphs and failures in terms of societal racism, oppression, relationships, economics, and aspirations.
Gospel music is a traditional genre of Christian music and a cornerstone of Christian media, characterized by dominant vocals and lyrics that reflect Christian teachings and values.
The creation, performance, significance, and even the definition of gospel music vary according to culture and social context.
Gospel music is composed and performed for many purposes, including aesthetic pleasure, and also religious or ceremonial purposes, and as an entertainment product for the marketplace.
Gospel music can be traced to the early 17th century.
Ballet is a type of performance dance that originated during the Italian Renaissance in the fifteenth century and later developed into a concert dance form in France and Russia.
It has since become a widespread and highly technical form of dance with its own vocabulary.
Ballet has been influential globally and has defined the foundational techniques which are used in many other dance genres and cultures.
Various schools around the world have incorporated their own cultures.
As a result, ballet has evolved in distinct ways.
Tango is a partner and social dance that originated in the 1880s along the Ro de la Plata, the natural border between Argentina and Uruguay.
The tango was born in the impoverished port areas of these countries from a combination of Argentine Milonga, Spanish-Cuban Habanera, and Uruguayan Candombe celebrations.
It was frequently practiced in the brothels and bars of ports, where business owners employed bands to entertain their patrons.
It then spread to the rest of the world.
A number of variations of this dance currently exist around the world.
Salsa is the name for Latin American dances that are danced to salsa music.
Salsa is one of the most popular types of Latin dance that is practiced worldwide, and is typically danced with a partner, although there are elements of solo footwork as well.
There are several distinct styles of salsa that are danced around the world.
The waltz is a ballroom and folk dance, in triple time, performed primarily in closed position, originating from German-speaking regions of Europe in the 18th century.
Along with the lndler and allemande, the waltz was sometimes referred to by the generic term German Dance in publications during the late 18th and early 19th centuries.
Hip hop dance is a range of street dance styles primarily performed to hip hop music or that have evolved as part of hip hop culture.
It is influenced by a wide range of styles that were created in the 1970s and made popular by dance crews in the United States.
The television show Soul Train and the 1980s films Breakin', Beat Street, and Wild Style showcased these crews and dance styles in their early stages; therefore, giving hip-hop dance mainstream exposure.
Breakdancing or breaking, also called b-boying or b-girling (women), is a style of street dance developed by African Americans and Puerto Ricans in the Bronx borough of New York City.
Flamenco is an art form based on the various folkloric music traditions of southern Spain, developed within the gitano subculture of the region of Andalusia, and also having historical presence in Extremadura and Murcia.
In a wider sense, the term is used to refer to a variety of both contemporary and traditional musical styles typical of southern Spain.
Flamenco is closely associated with the gitanos of the Romani ethnicity, who have contributed significantly to its origin and professionalization.
However, its style is uniquely Andalusian, and flamenco artists have historically included Spaniards of both gitano and non-gitano heritage.
Tap dance is a form of dance in which the dancers use sounds of tap shoes striking the floor as a form of percussion; it is often accompanied by music.
Tap dancing can also be performed with no musical accompaniment; the sound of the taps is its own music.
Chess is a board game for two players, played on a square board consisting of 64 squares arranged in an 88 grid.
The players, referred to as "White" and "Black", each control sixteen pieces: one king, one queen, two rooks, two bishops, two knights, and eight pawns, with each piece type having a different pattern of movement.
An enemy piece may be captured by moving one's own piece onto the square it occupies.
The object of the game is to "checkmate" the enemy king.
There are also several ways a game can end in a draw.
Beach volleyball was introduced to the program at the Atlanta 1996 Summer Olympics.
The adapted version of volleyball at the Summer Paralympic Games is sitting volleyball.
The unicorn is a legendary creature that has been described since antiquity as a beast with a single large, pointed, spiraling horn projecting from its forehead.
The griffin, griffon, or gryphon is a legendary creature with the body, tail, and back legs of a lion, and the head and wings of an eagle with its talons on the front legs.
A centaur, occasionally hippocentaur, collectively called the Centaurs or the Ixionidae, is a creature from Greek mythology with the upper body of a human and the lower body and legs of a horse that was said to live in the mountains of Thessaly.
In one version of the myth, the centaurs were named after Centaurus, and, through his brother Lapithes, were kin to the legendary tribe of the Lapiths.
He dwelt at the center of the Labyrinth, which was an elaborate maze-like construction designed by the architect Daedalus and his son Icarus, upon command of King Minos of Crete.
According to tradition, every nine years the people of Athens were compelled by King Minos to choose fourteen young noble citizens to be offered as sacrificial victims to the Minotaur in retribution for the death of Minos's son Androgeus.
The Minotaur was eventually slain by the Athenian hero Theseus, who managed to navigate the labyrinth with the help of a thread offered to him by the King's daughter, Ariadne.
In Greek mythology, Medusa, also called Gorgo or the Gorgon, was one of the three Gorgons.
Medusa is generally described as a woman with living snakes in place of hair; her appearance was so hideous that anyone who looked upon her was turned to stone.
Medusa and her Gorgon sisters Euryale and Stheno were usually described as daughters of Phorcys and Ceto; of the three, only Medusa was mortal.
The kraken is a legendary sea monster of enormous size, per its etymology something akin to a cephalopod, said to appear in the Norwegian Sea off the coast of Norway.
It is believed that the legend of the Kraken may have originated from sightings of giant squid, which may grow to 10.5 metres (34ft) in length.
A sphinx is a mythical creature with the head of a human, the body of a lion, and the wings of an eagle.
In Greek mythology, Cerberus, often referred to as the hound of Hades, is a multi-headed dog that guards the gates of the underworld to prevent the dead from leaving.
He was the offspring of the monsters Echidna and Typhon, and was usually described as having three heads, a serpent for a tail, and snakes protruding from his body.
Cerberus is primarily known for his capture by Heracles, the last of Heracles' twelve labours.
Printing is a process for mass reproducing text and images using a master form or template.
The earliest non-paper products involving printing include cylinder seals and objects such as the Cyrus Cylinder and the Cylinders of Nabonidus.
The earliest known form of printing evolved from ink rubbings made on paper or cloth from texts on stone tablets, used during the sixth century.
Printing by pressing an inked image onto paper appeared later that century.
Later developments in printing technology include the movable type invented by Bi Sheng around 1040 and the printing press invented by Johannes Gutenberg in the 15th century.
A camera is an instrument used to capture and store images and videos, either digitally via an electronic image sensor, or chemically via a light-sensitive material such as photographic film.
As a pivotal technology in the fields of photography and videography, cameras have played a significant role in the progression of visual arts, media, entertainment, surveillance, and scientific research.
The invention of the camera dates back to the 19th century and has since evolved with advancements in technology, leading to a vast array of types and models in the 21st century.
A phonograph, later called a gramophone, and since the 1940s a record player, or more recently a turntable, is a device for the mechanical and analogue reproduction of sound.
A typewriter is a mechanical or electromechanical machine for typing characters.
Typically, a typewriter has an array of keys, and each one causes a different single character to be produced on paper by striking an inked ribbon selectively against the paper with a type element.
Thereby, the machine produces a legible written document composed of ink and paper.
By the end of the 19th century, a person who used such a device was also referred to as a typewriter.
A sewing machine is a machine used to sew fabric and materials together with thread.
Sewing machines were invented during the first Industrial Revolution to decrease the amount of manual sewing work performed in clothing companies.
Since the invention of the first sewing machine, generally considered to have been the work of Englishman Thomas Saint in 1790, the sewing machine has greatly improved the efficiency and productivity of the clothing industry.
Refrigeration is an essential food storage technique around the world.
The low temperature reduces the reproduction rate of bacteria, so the refrigerator lowers the rate of spoilage.
A refrigerator maintains a temperature a few degrees above the freezing point of water.
The optimal temperature range for perishable food storage is 3 to 5C.
Air conditioning, often abbreviated as A/C (US) or air con (UK), is the process of removing heat from an enclosed space to achieve a more comfortable interior temperature and, in some cases, controlling the humidity of internal air.
Air conditioning can be achieved using a mechanical air conditioner or through other methods, such as passive cooling and ventilative cooling.
Air conditioning is a member of a family of systems and techniques that provide heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC).
Heat pumps are similar in many ways to air conditioners but use a reversing valve, allowing them to both heat and cool an enclosed space.
A washing machine is a machine designed to launder clothing.
The term is mostly applied to machines that use water.
Other ways of doing laundry include dry cleaning and ultrasonic cleaning.
A vacuum cleaner, also known simply as a vacuum, is a device that uses suction, and often agitation, in order to remove dirt and other debris from carpets, hard floors, and other surfaces.
A microwave oven, or simply microwave, is an electric oven that heats and cooks food by exposing it to electromagnetic radiation in the microwave frequency range.
This induces polar molecules in the food to rotate and produce thermal energy (heat) in a process known as dielectric heating.
Microwave ovens heat food quickly and efficiently; the heating effect is fairly uniform in the outer 2538 mm (11.5 inches) of a homogeneous, high-water-content food item.
A toaster is a small electric appliance that uses radiant heat to cook sliced bread into toast.
When cooked the bread browns due to the maillard reaction.
It typically consists of one or more slots into which bread is inserted, lowered, and cooked using heating elements, often made of nichrome wire, to generate heat and toast the bread.
An elevator or lift is a machine that vertically transports people or freight between levels.
They are typically powered by electric motors that drive traction cables and counterweight systems such as a hoist, although some pump hydraulic fluid to raise a cylindrical piston like a jack.
An escalator is a moving staircase which carries people between floors of a building or structure.
It consists of a motor-driven chain of individually linked steps on a track which cycle on a pair of tracks which keep the step tread horizontal.
A zipper, zip, zip fastener (UK), formerly known as a clasp locker, is a commonly used device for binding together two edges of fabric or other flexible material.
Used in clothing, luggage and other bags, camping gear, and many other items, zippers come in a wide range of sizes, shapes, and colors.
Judson, an American inventor from Chicago, patented the original design from which the modern device evolved.
Diffusion is the net movement of anything generally from a region of higher concentration to a region of lower concentration.
Diffusion is driven by a gradient in Gibbs free energy or chemical potential.
It is possible to diffuse "uphill" from a region of lower concentration to a region of higher concentration, as in spinodal decomposition.
Diffusion is a stochastic process due to the inherent randomness of the diffusing entity and can be used to model many real-life stochastic scenarios.
Therefore, diffusion and the corresponding mathematical models are used in several fields beyond physics, such as statistics, probability theory, information theory, neural networks, finance, and marketing.
Convection is the transfer of heat through the physical movement of fluids, where warmer, less-dense material rises and cooler, denser material sinks.
Vienna is the capital, most populous city, and one of the nine states of Austria.
It is Austria's primate city, with just over two million inhabitants.
Its larger metropolitan area has a population of nearly 2.9million, representing nearly one-third of the country's population.
Vienna is the cultural, economic, and political centre of the country, the fifth-largest city by population in the European Union, and the most populous of the cities on the river Danube.
Budapest is the capital and most populous city of Hungary.
It is Hungary's primate city with 1.7 million inhabitants and its greater metro area has a population of about 3.3 million, representing one-third of the country's population and producing more than 40% of the country's economic output.
Budapest is the political, economic, and cultural center of the country, among the ten largest cities in the European Union and the second largest urban area in Central and Eastern Europe.
Budapest stands on the River Danube and is strategically located at the center of the Pannonian Basin, lying on ancient trade routes linking the hills of Transdanubia with the Great Plain.
Warsaw, officially the Capital City of Warsaw, is the capital and most populous city of Poland.
The metropolis stands on the River Vistula in east-central Poland.
Its population is officially estimated at 1.86million residents within a greater metropolitan area of 3.27million residents, which makes Warsaw the 7th most populous city in the European Union.
The city area measures 517 square kilometres and comprises 18 districts, while the metropolitan area covers 6,100 square kilometres.
Warsaw is classified as an alpha global city, a major political, economic and cultural hub, and the country's seat of government.
Athens is the capital and largest city of Greece.
A significant coastal urban area in the Mediterranean, Athens is also the capital of the Attica region and is the southernmost capital on the European mainland.
With its urban area's population numbering over 3.6 million, it is the eighth-largest urban area in the European Union (EU).
The Municipality of Athens, which constitutes a small administrative unit of the entire urban area, had a population of 643,452 in 2021, within its official limits, and a land area of 38.96 square kilometres.
Helsinki, until about 1930 known in English by its Swedish name of Helsingfors, is the capital and most populous city in Finland.
It is on the shore of the Gulf of Finland and is the seat of southern Finland's Uusimaa region.
About 694,000 people live in the municipality, with 1.3million in the capital region and 1.6million in the metropolitan area.
As the most populous urban area in Finland, it is the country's most significant centre for politics, education, finance, culture, and research.
Helsinki is 80 kilometres (50mi) north of Tallinn, Estonia, 400 kilometres (250mi) east of Stockholm, Sweden, and 300 kilometres (190mi) west of Saint Petersburg, Russia.
Oslo is the capital and most populous city of Norway.
It constitutes both a county and a municipality.
The municipality of Oslo had a population of 724,290 in 2025, while the city's greater urban area had a population of 1,110,887 in 2025, and the metropolitan area had an estimated population of 1,546,706 in 2021.
Dublin is the capital and largest city of Ireland.
Situated on Dublin Bay at the mouth of the River Liffey, it is in the province of Leinster, and is bordered on the south by the Dublin Mountains, part of the Wicklow Mountains range.
Various definitions of a metropolitan Greater Dublin Area exist.
Brussels, officially the Brussels-Capital Region, is a region of Belgium comprising 19 municipalities, including the City of Brussels, which is the capital of Belgium.
The Brussels-Capital Region is located in the central portion of the country.
It is a part of both the French Community of Belgium and the Flemish Community, and is separate from the Flemish Region (Flanders), within which it forms an enclave, and the Walloon Region (Wallonia), located less than 4km (2.5mi) south.
Zurich is the largest city in Switzerland and the capital of the canton of Zurich.
It is in north-central Switzerland, at the northwestern tip of Lake Zurich.
As of the end of 2024, the municipality had a population of 436,551, while the urban area was home to 1.45 million people (2020), and the Zurich metropolitan area had a total population of 2.1 million (2020).
Zurich is a hub for railways, roads, and air traffic.
Both Zurich Airport and Zurich's main railway station are the largest and busiest in the country.
Montreal is the largest city in the province of Quebec, the second-largest in Canada, and the eighth-largest in North America.
Founded in 1642 as Ville-Marie, or "City of Mary", it now takes its name from Mount Royal, the triple-peaked mountain around which the early settlement was built.
The city is centred on the Island of Montreal and a few, much smaller, peripheral islands, the largest of which is le Bizard.
It lies 196 kilometres (122mi) east of the national capital, Ottawa, and 258 kilometres (160mi) southwest of the provincial capital, Quebec City.
Vancouver is a major city in Western Canada, located in the Lower Mainland region of British Columbia.
As the most populous city in the province, the 2021 Canadian census recorded 662,248 people in the city, up from 631,486 in 2016.
The Metro Vancouver area had a population of 2.6million in 2021, making it the third-largest metropolitan area in Canada.
Greater Vancouver, along with the Fraser Valley, comprises the Lower Mainland with a regional population of over 3million.
Vancouver has the highest population density in Canada, with over 5,700 inhabitants per square kilometre (15,000/sqmi), and the fourth highest in North America.
Melbourne is the capital and most populous city of the Australian state of Victoria and the second-most populous city in Australia.
The city's name generally refers to a 9,993-square-kilometre (3,858sqmi) area, comprising an urban agglomeration of 31 local government areas.
The name is also used specifically to refer to the local government area also named the City of Melbourne, whose administrative area is centred on the Melbourne central business district and some immediate surrounds.
Auckland is a large metropolitan city in the North Island of New Zealand.
It has an urban population of about 1,547,200.
It is located in the greater Auckland Region, the area governed by Auckland Council, which includes outlying rural areas and the islands of the Hauraki Gulf, and which has a total population of 1,816,000 as of June 2025.
It is the most populous city of New Zealand and the fifth-most populous city in Oceania.
Cape Town is the legislative capital of South Africa.
It is the country's oldest city and the seat of the Parliament of South Africa.
Cape Town is the country's second-largest city by population, after Johannesburg, and the largest city in the Western Cape.
The city is part of the City of Cape Town metropolitan municipality.
Rio de Janeiro, also known simply as Rio, is the capital of the state of Rio de Janeiro.
It is the second-most-populous city in Brazil after So Paulo with a population of 13 million people following 2025, and the sixth-most-populous city in the Americas.
Buenos Aires, officially the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires, is the capital and largest city of Argentina.
It is located on the southwest of the Ro de la Plata.
Buenos Aires is classified as an Alpha global city, according to the GaWC 2024 ranking.
The city proper has a population of 3.1 million and its urban area has a population of 16.7 million, making it the 21st most populous metropolitan area in the world.
Lima is the capital and largest city of Peru, as well as a primate city.
It is located in the valleys of the Chilln, Rmac and Lurn Rivers, in the desert zone of the central coastal part of the country, overlooking the Pacific Ocean.
The city is considered the political, cultural, financial and commercial center of Peru.
Due to its geostrategic importance, the Globalization and World Cities Research Network has categorized it as a "beta" tier city.
Jurisdictionally, the metropolis extends mainly within the province of Lima and in a smaller portion, to the west, within the Constitutional Province of Callao, where the seaport and the Jorge Chvez Airport are located.
Nairobi is the capital and largest city of Kenya, located in the south-central part of the country.
As of 2024, it has a population of 4.8 million and a metropolitan population of 5.7 million, making it the 8th most populous city in Africa.
Nicknamed the "Green City under the Sun", Nairobi is uniquely notable for being the only capital city in the world that hosts a national park within its boundaries.
Its name originates from the Maasai phrase Enkare Nyirobi, meaning "place of cool waters".
Forestry is the science and craft of creating, managing, planting, using, conserving and repairing forests and woodlands for associated resources for human and environmental benefits.
Forestry is practiced in plantations and natural stands.
The science of forestry has elements that belong to the biological, physical, social, political and managerial sciences.
Forest management plays an essential role in creating and modifying habitats, and affects ecosystem services provisioning.
A practitioner of forestry is a forester.
Tourism is travel for pleasure, and the commercial activity of providing and supporting such travel.
Tourism can be domestic or international.
International tourism has both incoming and outgoing implications on a country's balance of payments.
Publishing  is the process of making information, literature, music, software, and other content, whether in physical or digital form, available to the public for sale or free of charge.
Traditionally, the term publishing refers to the creation and distribution of printed works, such as books, zines, comic books, newspapers, and magazines, to the public.
The advent of digital information systems has led to an expansion of its scope to include digital publishing, such as e-books, digital magazines, websites, social media, music, and video game publishing.
Advertising is the practice and techniques employed to bring attention to a product or service.
Advertising aims to present a product or service in terms of utility, advantages, and qualities of interest to consumers.
It is typically used to promote a specific good or service, but there is a wide range of uses, a traditional form being commercial advertisement.
A bank is a financial institution that accepts deposits from the public and creates a demand deposit while making loans.
Lending activities can be directly performed by the bank or indirectly through capital markets.
Insurance is a means of protection from financial loss in which, in exchange for a fee, a party agrees to compensate another party in the event of a certain loss, damage, or injury.
It is a form of risk management, primarily used to protect against the risk of a contingent or uncertain loss.
Real estate is a property consisting of land and the buildings on it, along with its natural resources such as growing crops, minerals or water, and wild animals; immovable property of this nature is real property or housing in general.
In terms of law, real relates to land property and is different from personal property, while estate means the "interest" a person has in that land property.
Retail is the sale of goods and services to consumers, in contrast to wholesaling, which is the sale to business or institutional customers.
A retailer purchases goods in large quantities from manufacturers, directly from or through a wholesaler, and then sells in smaller quantities to consumers for a profit.
Retailers are the final link in the supply chain from producers to consumers.
In general, it is the sale of goods in bulk to anyone, either a person or an organization, other than the end consumer of that merchandise.
Wholesaling involves purchasing goods in bulk, usually directly from the manufacturer or source, at a discounted rate.
Retailers then sell these goods to end consumers at a higher price, generating a profit.
Logistics management is a component that holds the supply chain together.
The resources managed in logistics include physical goods such as materials, equipment, and foodstuffs, and also intangible items such as time and information.
Marriage, also called matrimony or wedlock, is a culturally and often legally recognised union between people called spouses.
It establishes rights and obligations between them, as well as between them and their children, and between them and their in-laws.
It is nearly a cultural universal, but the definition of marriage varies between cultures and religions, and over time.
Typically, it is an institution in which interpersonal relationships, usually sexual, are acknowledged or sanctioned.
In some cultures, marriage is recommended or considered to be compulsory before pursuing sexual activity, and sexual intercourse with others aside from one's spouse may be considered immoral or even illegal.
Divorce is the process of terminating a marriage.
Divorce usually entails canceling or reorganising the legal duties and responsibilities of marriage according to the law of the particular country or state.
Adoption is a process whereby a person assumes the parenting of another, usually a child, from that person's biological or legal parent or parents.
Legal adoptions permanently transfer all rights and responsibilities, along with filiation, from the biological parents to the adoptive parents.
Immigration is the international movement of people to a destination country of which they are not usual residents or where they do not possess nationality in order to settle as permanent residents.
A republic, based on the Latin phrase res publica, is a state in which political power rests with the public (people), typically through their representativesin contrast to a monarchy.
Although a republic is most often a single sovereign state, subnational state entities that have governments that are republican in nature may be referred to as republics.
Zoology is the scientific study of animals.
Its studies include the structure, embryology, classification, habits, and distribution of all animals, both living and extinct, and how they interact with their ecosystems.
Zoology is one of the primary branches of biology.
The term is derived from Ancient Greek   (zion)'animal' and   (lgos)'study of'.
Botany, also called phytology or plant science, is the branch of natural science and biology that studies plants, especially their anatomy, taxonomy, and ecology.
A botanist or plant scientist is a scientist who specialises in this field.
"Plant" and "botany" may be defined more narrowly to include only land plants and their study, which is also known as phytology.
Phytologists or botanists study approximately 410,000 species of land plants, including some 391,000 species of vascular plants and approximately 20,000 bryophytes.
Microbiology is the scientific study of microorganisms, those being of unicellular (single-celled), multicellular, or acellular.
Microbiology encompasses numerous sub-disciplines including virology, bacteriology, protistology, mycology, immunology, and parasitology.
Virology is the scientific study of biological viruses.
Immunology is a branch of biology and medicine that covers the study of immune systems in all organisms.
He observed that organisms inherit traits by way of discrete "units of inheritance".
Genomics is an interdisciplinary field of molecular biology focusing on the structure, function, evolution, mapping, and editing of genomes.
A genome is an organism's complete set of DNA, including all of its genes as well as its hierarchical, three-dimensional structural configuration.
Genes may direct the production of proteins with the assistance of enzymes and messenger molecules.
In turn, proteins make up body structures such as organs and tissues as well as control chemical reactions and carry signals between cells.
Impressionism originated with a group of Paris-based artists whose independent exhibitions brought them to prominence during the 1870s and 1880s.
Expressionism is a modernist movement, initially in poetry and painting, originating in Northern Europe around the beginning of the 20th century.
Its typical trait is to present the world solely from a subjective perspective, distorting it radically for emotional effect in order to evoke moods or ideas.
Expressionist artists have sought to express the meaning of emotional experience rather than physical reality.
Cubism is an early-20th-century avant-garde art movement which began in Paris.
It revolutionized painting and the visual arts, and sparked artistic innovations in music, ballet, literature, and architecture.
Surrealism is an art and cultural movement that developed in Europe in the aftermath of World War I in which artists aimed to allow the unconscious mind to express itself, often resulting in the depiction of illogical or dreamlike scenes and ideas.
Its intention was, according to leader Andr Breton, to "resolve the previously contradictory conditions of dream and reality into an absolute reality, a super-reality", or surreality.
It produced works of painting, writing, photography, theatre, filmmaking, music, comedy and other media as well.
Abstract art uses visual language of shape, form, color, and line to create a composition which may exist with a degree of independence from visual references in the world.
Abstract art, non-figurative art, non-objective art, and non-representational art are all closely related terms.
They have similar, but perhaps not identical, meanings.
Art Nouveau is an international style of art, architecture, and applied art, especially the decorative arts.
It was often inspired by natural forms such as the sinuous curves of plants and flowers.
It was popular between 1890 and 1910 during the Belle poque period, and was a reaction against the academicism, eclecticism and historicism of 19th-century architecture and decorative art.
Art Deco has influenced buildings from skyscrapers to cinemas, bridges, ocean liners, trains, cars, trucks, buses, furniture, and everyday objects, including radios and vacuum cleaners.
Pop art is an art movement that emerged in the United Kingdom and the United States during the mid-to late 1950s.
The movement presented a challenge to traditions of fine art by including imagery from popular and mass cultureincluding advertising, comic strips, product packaging, celebrities, and everyday consumer goodsinto painting, sculpture, and printmaking.
By elevating the banal, the kitsch, and the mass-produced to the status of high art, pop art blurred the boundaries between high and low culture.
It is also associated with the artists' use of mechanical means of reproduction or rendering techniques.
In pop art, material is sometimes visually removed from its known context, isolated, or combined with unrelated material.
In Western tonal music, a key represents the most common pitches and the center of tonal stability in a song or other composition.
In music, an octave (Latin: octavus: eighth) or perfect octave (sometimes called the diapason) is an interval between two tones, one having twice the frequency of vibration of the other.
For instance, the interval between C4 and C5 (in scientific pitch notation) is an octave.
In music theory, an interval is a difference in pitch between two sounds.
An interval may be described as horizontal, linear, or melodic if it refers to successively sounding tones, such as two adjacent pitches in a melody, and vertical or harmonic if it pertains to simultaneously sounding tones, such as in a chord.
Red is the color at the long wavelength end of the visible spectrum of light, next to orange and opposite violet.
It has a dominant wavelength of approximately 625750 nanometers.
It is a primary color in the RGB color model and a secondary color in the CMYK color model, and is the complementary color of cyan.
Reds range from the brilliant yellow-tinged scarlet and vermillion to bluish-red crimson, and vary in shade from the pale red pink to the dark red burgundy.
Blue is one of the three primary colours in the RGB (additive) colour model, as well as in the RYB colour model.
It lies between violet and cyan on the spectrum of visible light.
The term blue generally describes colours perceived by humans observing light with a dominant wavelength between approximately 450 and 495nanometres.
The clear daytime sky and the deep sea appear blue because of an optical effect known as Rayleigh scattering.
An optical effect called the Tyndall effect explains blue eyes.
Green is the color between cyan and yellow on the visible spectrum.
It has 295350 different shades.
It is evoked by light which has a dominant wavelength of roughly 495570 nm.
By far the largest contributor to green in nature is chlorophyll, the chemical by which plants photosynthesize and convert sunlight into chemical energy.
Yellow is a color between green and orange on the spectrum of light.
It is evoked by light with a dominant wavelength of roughly 575585 nm.
It is a primary color in subtractive color systems, used in painting or color printing.
In the RGB color model, used to create colors on television and computer screens, yellow is a secondary color made by combining red and green at equal intensity.
Carotenoids give the characteristic yellow color to autumn leaves, corn, canaries, daffodils, and lemons, as well as egg yolks, buttercups, and bananas.
Purple is a color similar in appearance to violet light.
In the RYB color model historically used in the arts, purple is a secondary color created by combining red and blue pigments.
In the CMYK color model used in modern printing, purple is made by combining magenta pigment with either cyan pigment, black pigment, or both.
In the RGB color model used in computer and television screens, purple is created by mixing red and blue light in order to create colors that appear similar to violet light.
According to color theory, purple is considered a cool color.
Orange is the colour between yellow and red on the spectrum of visible light.
The human eyes perceive orange when observing light with a dominant wavelength between roughly 585 and 620 nanometres.
In traditional colour theory, it is a secondary colour of pigments, produced by mixing yellow and red.
In the RGB colour model, it is a tertiary colour.
It is named after the fruit of the same name.
Pink is a pale tint of red or rose, the color of the pink flower.
It was first used as a color name in the late 17th century.
A combination of pink and white is associated with innocence, whereas a combination of pink and black links to eroticism and seduction.
It can be thought as a darker, typically desaturated shade of orange, and can often be produced by combining red and yellow with another color, namely blue.
Black is a color that results from the absence or complete absorption of visible light.
It is an achromatic color, without chroma, like white and grey.
It is often used symbolically or figuratively to represent darkness.
Black and white have often been used to describe opposites such as good and evil, the Dark Ages versus the Age of Enlightenment, and night versus day.
Since the Middle Ages, black has been the symbolic color of solemnity and authority, and for this reason it is still commonly worn by judges and magistrates.
White is the lightest color and is achromatic.
It is the color of objects such as snow, chalk, and milk, and is the opposite of black.
White objects fully reflect and scatter all the visible wavelengths of light.
White on television and computer screens is created by a mixture of red, blue, and green light.
The color white can be given with white pigments, especially titanium dioxide.
A triangle or trigon is a polygon with three corners and three sides, one of the basic shapes in geometry.
The corners, also called vertices, are zero-dimensional points while the sides connecting them, also called edges, are one-dimensional line segments.
A triangle has three internal angles, each one bounded by a pair of adjacent edges; the sum of angles of a triangle always equals a straight angle.
The triangle is a plane figure and its interior is a planar region.
Sometimes an arbitrary edge is chosen to be the base, in which case the opposite vertex is called the apex; the shortest segment between the base and apex is the height.
In geometry, a square is a regular quadrilateral.
It has four straight sides of equal length and four equal angles.
Squares are special cases of rectangles, which have four equal angles, and of rhombuses, which have four equal sides.
As with all rectangles, a square's angles are right angles, making adjacent sides perpendicular.
The area of a square is the side length multiplied by itself, and so in algebra, multiplying a number by itself is called squaring.
A cube is a three-dimensional solid object in geometry.
It has eight vertices and twelve straight edges of the same length, so that these edges form six square faces of the same size.
It is an example of a polyhedron.
It is a special case of a cuboid, a parallelepiped, and a rhombohedron in which all six quadrilateral faces are squares.
It is a three-dimensional hypercube, a family of polytopes that also includes the two-dimensional square and four-dimensional tesseract.
Primes are central in number theory because of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic: every natural number greater than 1 is either a prime itself or can be factorized as a product of primes that is unique up to their order.
In mathematics, the factorial of a non-negative integer , denoted by , is the product of all positive integers less than or equal to .
The factorial of  also equals the product of  with the next smaller factorial:

For example,

The value of 0!
is 1, according to the convention for an empty product.
Thailand has a population of nearly 66 million people and covers an area of approximately 513,115km2.
The capital and largest city is Bangkok.
Its capital is Hanoi, while its largest city is Ho Chi Minh City.
The Philippines, officially the Republic of the Philippines, is an archipelagic country in Southeast Asia.
Located in the western Pacific Ocean, it consists of about 7,641 islands, with a total area of about 300,000 square kilometers, which are broadly categorized in three main geographical divisions from north to south: Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao.
With a population of over 114 million, it is the world's twelfth-most-populous country.
Malaysia is a country in Southeast Asia.
A federal constitutional monarchy, it consists of 13 states and three federal territories, separated by the South China Sea into two regions: Peninsular Malaysia on Mainland Southeast Asia and East Malaysia on the island of Borneo.
With a population of over 34 million, it is the world's 43rd-most populous country.
Pakistan is the 33rd-largest country by area.
Bounded by the Arabian Sea on the south, the Gulf of Oman on the southwest, and the Sir Creek on the southeast, it shares land borders with India to the east; Afghanistan to the west; Iran to the southwest; and China to the northeast.
Bangladesh, officially the People's Republic of Bangladesh, is a country in South Asia.
It is the eighth-most populous country in the world and among the most densely populated with a population of almost 176 million within an area of 148,461 square kilometres (57,321sqmi).
Bangladesh shares land borders with India to the north, west, and east, and Myanmar to the southeast.
It has a coastline along the Bay of Bengal to its south and is separated from Bhutan and Nepal by the Siliguri Corridor, and from China by the Indian state of Sikkim to its north.
Dhaka, the capital and largest city, is the nation's political, financial, and cultural centre.
It is divided into five regions with 31 provinces.
Tehran is the nation's capital and largest city and serves as its primary economic centre.
Iraq, officially the Republic of Iraq, is a country in West Asia.
Located within the Middle East, it is bordered by Saudi Arabia to the south, Turkey to the north, Iran to the east, the Persian Gulf and Kuwait to the southeast, Jordan to the southwest, and Syria to the west.
The country covers an area of 438,317 square kilometres (169,235sqmi) and has a population of over 46 million, making it the 58th largest country by area and the 31st most populous in the world.
Baghdad, home to over 8 million people, is the capital city and the largest in the country.
Kabul is the country's capital and largest city.
Afghanistan's population is estimated to be between 35 and 50 million.
North Korea, officially the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), is a country in East Asia.
It constitutes the northern half of the Korean Peninsula and borders China and Russia to the north at the Yalu (Amnok) and Tumen rivers, and South Korea to the south at the Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ).
The country's western border is formed by the Yellow Sea, while its eastern border is defined by the Sea of Japan.
Pyongyang is the capital and largest city.
Cuba, officially the Republic of Cuba, is an island country in the Caribbean.
It comprises the eponymous main island as well as 4,195 islands, islets, and cays.
Situated at the convergence of the Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Mexico, and Atlantic Ocean, Cuba is located east of the Yucatn Peninsula, south of both Florida and the Bahamas, west of Hispaniola, and north of Jamaica and the Cayman Islands.
Havana is the largest city and capital.
Cuba is the third-most populous country in the Caribbean after Haiti and Dominican Republic, with about 10 million inhabitants.
Venezuela, officially the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, is a country on the northern coast of South America, consisting of a continental landmass and various islands and islets in the Caribbean Sea.
It comprises an area of 912,050km2 (352,140sqmi), with a population estimated at 31.8 million in 2025.
The capital and largest urban agglomeration is Caracas.
The continental territory is bordered on the north by the Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean, on the west by Colombia, Brazil on the south, Trinidad and Tobago to the north-east, and on the east by Guyana.
Venezuela consists of 23 states, the Capital District, and federal dependencies covering Venezuela's offshore islands.
Peru, officially the Republic of Peru, is a country in western South America.
It is bordered to the north by Ecuador and Colombia, to the east by Brazil, to the southeast by Bolivia, to the south by Chile, and to the south and west by the Pacific Ocean.
Peru has a population of over 32 million, and its capital and largest city is Lima.
At 1,285,216km2 (496,225sqmi), Peru is the 19th largest country in the world, and the third largest in South America.
Ecuador, officially the Republic of Ecuador, is a country in northwestern South America, bordered by Colombia on the north, Peru on the east and south, and the Pacific Ocean on the west.
It also includes the Galpagos Province which contains the Galpagos Islands in the Pacific, about 1,000 kilometers west of the mainland.
The country's capital is Quito, and the largest city is Guayaquil.
Paraguay, officially the Republic of Paraguay, is a landlocked country located in the central region of South America.
It borders Bolivia to the northwest and north, Brazil to the northeast and east, and Argentina to the southeast, south, and west.
Paraguay has access to the Atlantic Ocean via the ParanParaguay Waterway.
The country is governed as a unitary presidential republic composed of a capital district and seventeen departments.
Its capital and largest city is Asuncin.
Uruguay, officially the Eastern Republic of Uruguay, is a country in South America.
It shares borders with Argentina to its west and southwest and Brazil to its north and northeast, while bordering the Ro de la Plata to the south and the Atlantic Ocean to the southeast.
It is part of the Southern Cone region of South America.
Uruguay covers an area of approximately 176,215 square kilometers (68,037sqmi).
It has a population of almost 3.5 million people, of whom nearly 2 million live in the metropolitan area of its capital and largest city, Montevideo.
Panama, officially the Republic of Panama, is a country located at the southern end of Central America in North America, bordering South America.
It is bordered by Costa Rica to the west, Colombia to the southeast, the Caribbean Sea to the north, and the Pacific Ocean to the south.
Its capital and largest city is Panama City, whose metropolitan area is home to nearly half of the country's over 4million inhabitants.
Costa Rica, officially the Republic of Costa Rica, is a country in Central America.
It borders Nicaragua to the north, the Caribbean Sea to the northeast, Panama to the southeast, and the Pacific Ocean to the southwest, sharing a maritime border with Ecuador to the south of Cocos Island.
It has a population of around five million in a land area of nearly 51,180km2 (19,760sqmi); the capital and largest city is San Jos, home to around 350,000 residents and two million people in the surrounding metropolitan area.
Jamaica is an island country in the Caribbean, covering 10,991 square kilometres (4,244sqmi).
It is the third-largest island in the Greater Antilles and the Caribbean, after Cuba and the island of Hispaniola.
Jamaica lies about 145km (78nmi) south of Cuba, 191km (103nmi) west of Hispaniola, and 215km (116nmi) southeast of the Cayman Islands.
With 2.8 million people, Jamaica is the third most populous Anglophone country in the Americas and the fourth most populous country in the Caribbean.
Kingston is the country's capital and largest city.
Trinidad and Tobago, officially the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, is the southernmost archipelagic country in the Caribbean, comprising the main islands of Trinidad and Tobago, along with several smaller islets.
The capital city is Port of Spain, while its largest and most populous municipality is Chaguanas.
Trinidad and Tobago comprises the southernmost islands of the Caribbean eastern islands chain, and it is close to the continent of South America, being north to northeast of Venezuela and northwest of Guyana.
The Bahamas, officially the Commonwealth of The Bahamas, is an archipelagic country in the Caribbean located within the Lucayan Archipelago in the Atlantic Ocean.
The country comprises 700 islands, and more than 2,500 cays in the Atlantic Ocean, located north of Cuba and north-west of the island of Hispaniola and the Turks and Caicos Islands, southeast of the US state of Florida and east of the Florida Keys.
The capital and largest city is Nassau on the island of New Providence.
The Royal Bahamas Defence Force describes the Bahamas' territory as encompassing 470,000km2 (180,000sqmi) of ocean space.
The official language of the country is Icelandic.
Iceland is on a rift between tectonic plates, and its geologic activity includes geysers and frequent volcanic eruptions.
Monaco, officially the Principality of Monaco, is a sovereign city-state and microstate in Western Europe.
Situated on the French Riviera, it is a semi-enclave bordered by France to the north, east, and west, with the Mediterranean Sea to the south; the Italian region of Liguria is about 15km (9.3mi) east.
With a population of 38,423 living in an area of 2.08km2 (0.80sqmi), Monaco is the second smallest sovereign state in the world, after Vatican City, as well as the most densely populated.
It also has the world's shortest national coastline of any non-landlocked nation, at 3.83km (2.38mi).
Fewer than 10,000 of its residents are Mongasque nationals.
Vatican City, officially the Vatican City State, often shortened as the Vatican, is a landlocked sovereign city-state in Southern Europe.
Ruled by the pope, it is an enclave within the city of Rome, Italy, and serves as the administrative centre of the Catholic Church.
Vatican City is governed by the See of Rome, commonly known as the Holy See, itself a sovereign entity under international law, which maintains its temporal power, governance, diplomacy, and spiritual independence.
Vatican is also used as a metonym for the Holy See, which is the central governing body of the Catholic Church and Vatican City, comprising the pope and the Roman Curia.
Liechtenstein, officially the Principality of Liechtenstein, is a doubly landlocked country in the Central European Alps.
A microstate, It is located between Austria to the east and north-east and Switzerland to the north-west, west and south.
It is currently headed by two co-princes: the Bishop of Urgell in Catalonia, Spain, and the president of France.
Its capital and largest city is Andorra la Vella.
The Hundred Years' War was a conflict between the kingdoms of England and France and a civil war in France during the late Middle Ages.
It emerged from feudal disputes over the Duchy of Aquitaine and was triggered by a claim to the French throne made by Edward III of England.
The war grew into a broader military, economic, and political struggle involving factions from across Western Europe, fuelled by emerging nationalism on both sides.
The periodisation of the war typically charts it as taking place over 116 years.
However, it was an intermittent conflict which was frequently interrupted by external factors, such as the Black Death, and several years of truces.
The conflict began on 2April 1982, when Argentina invaded and occupied the Falkland Islands, followed by the invasion of South Georgia the next day.
On 5April the British government dispatched a naval task force to engage the Argentine Navy and Air Force before making an amphibious assault on the islands.
The conflict lasted 74days and ended with an Argentine surrender on 14June, returning the islands to British control.
In total, 649Argentine military personnel, 255British military personnel, and 3 Falkland Islanders were killed during the hostilities.
Babylonia was an ancient Akkadian-speaking state and cultural area based on the city of Babylon in central-southern Mesopotamia.
It emerged as an Akkadian-populated but Amorite-ruled state c.
During the reign of Hammurabi and afterwards, Babylonia was retrospectively called "the country of Akkad", a deliberate archaism in reference to the previous glory of the Akkadian Empire.
It was often involved in rivalry with the culturally and linguistically-related state of Assyria in Upper Mesopotamia, which was also an Akkadian-populated and derived civilisation, and with Elam to the east.
The Achaemenid Empire was an ancient Iranian empire founded by Cyrus the Great of the Achaemenid dynasty in 550 BC.
At peak, its territorial extent was roughly 5.5million square kilometres, making it the largest empire of its time.
Based in the Iranian plateau, it stretched from the Balkans and Cyrenaica in the west to the Indus Valley in the east, including Anatolia, Cyprus, Mesopotamia, the Levant, the South Caucasus, parts of Eastern Arabia, and large parts of Central Asia.
The Phoenicians were an ancient Semitic people who inhabited city-states in Canaan along the Levantine coast of the eastern Mediterranean, primarily in present-day Lebanon.
Their maritime civilization expanded and contracted over time, with its cultural core stretching from Arwad to Mount Carmel.
Through trade and colonization, the Phoenicians extended their influence across the Mediterranean, from Cyprus to the Maghreb and Iberian Peninsula, leaving behind thousands of inscriptions.
Carthage was an ancient city in northern Africa founded by the legendary queen Dido on the eastern side of the Lake of Tunis in what is now Tunisia.
Carthage was one of the most important trading hubs of the Ancient Mediterranean and one of the most affluent cities of the classical world.
It became the capital city of the civilization of Ancient Carthage and later Roman Carthage.
Terraform or Terraformer may refer to:Terraforming, a hypothetical planetary engineering process
Terraform (software), an infrastructure as configuration software tool
Ansible is a suite of software tools that enables infrastructure as code.
It is open-source and the suite includes software provisioning, configuration management, and application deployment functionality.
Jenkins is an open source automation server.
It helps automate the parts of software development related to building, testing, and deploying, facilitating continuous integration, and continuous delivery.
It is a server-based system that runs in servlet containers such as Apache Tomcat, or by default as a stand-alone web-application in co-bundled Eclipse Jetty.
It supports version control tools, including AccuRev, CVS, Subversion, Git, Mercurial, Perforce, ClearCase, and RTC, and can execute Apache Ant, Apache Maven, and sbt based projects as well as arbitrary shell scripts and Windows batch commands.
nginx is a web server that can also be used as a reverse proxy, load balancer, mail proxy and HTTP cache.
The software was created by Russian developer Igor Sysoev and publicly released in 2004.
nginx is free and open-source software, released under the terms of the 2-clause BSD license.
A large fraction of web servers use nginx, often as a load balancer.
The Apache HTTP Server is a free and open-source cross-platform web server, released under the terms of Apache License 2.0.
It is developed and maintained by a community of developers under the auspices of the Apache Software Foundation.
MySQL is a free and open-source relational database management system (RDBMS).
Its name is a combination of "My", the name of co-founder Michael Widenius' daughter My, and "SQL", the acronym for Structured Query Language.
A relational database organizes data into one or more data tables in which data may be related to each other; these relations help structure the data.
SQL is a language that programmers use to create, modify and extract data from the relational database, as well as control user access to the database.
MongoDB is a source-available, cross-platform, document-oriented database program.
Classified as a NoSQL database product, MongoDB uses JSON-like documents with optional schemas.
Released in February 2009 by 10gen, it supports features like sharding, replication, and ACID transactions.
MongoDB Atlas, its managed cloud service, operates on AWS, Google Cloud Platform, and Microsoft Azure.
Current versions are licensed under the Server Side Public License (SSPL).
Redis is an in-memory keyvalue database, used as a distributed cache and message broker, with optional durability.
Because it holds all data in memory and because of its design, Redis offers low-latency reads and writes, making it particularly suitable for use cases that require a cache.
Elasticsearch is a source-available search engine developed by Elastic.
It is based on Apache Lucene and provides a distributed, multitenant-capable full-text search engine with an HTTP web interface and schema-free JSON documents.
Official clients are available in Java, C#, PHP, Python, Ruby, and other languages.
According to the DB-Engines ranking, Elasticsearch is the most popular enterprise search engine.
Apache Kafka is a distributed event store and stream-processing platform.
It is an open-source system developed by the Apache Software Foundation written in Java and Scala.
The project aims to provide a unified, high-throughput, low-latency platform for handling real-time data feeds.
Kafka can connect to external systems via Kafka Connect, and provides the Kafka Streams libraries for stream processing applications.
Kafka uses a binary TCP-based protocol that is optimized for efficiency and relies on a "message set" abstraction that naturally groups messages together to reduce the overhead of the network roundtrip.
Prometheus is a free software application for event monitoring and alerting.
It records metrics in a time series database built using an HTTP pull model, supporting high dimensionality through key-value label pairs, flexible queries, and real-time alerting.
The project is written in Go and licensed under the Apache 2.0 License, with source code available on GitHub.
Grafana is an open-source analytics and visualization web application.
It connects to time series databases and other data sources, allowing users to build dashboards that display metrics, logs, and traces.
Grafana supports data sources including Prometheus, AWS CloudWatch, Graphite, InfluxDB, Elasticsearch, PostgreSQL, and MySQL.
Unix is a family of multitasking, multi-user computer operating systems that derive from the original AT&T Unix, the development of which started in 1969 at the Bell Labs research center by Ken Thompson, Dennis Ritchie, and others.
FreeBSD is a free and open-source Unix-like operating system descended from the Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD).
The first version was released in 1993 developed from 386BSD, one of the first fully functional and free Unix clones on affordable home-class hardware, and has since continuously been the most commonly used BSD-derived operating system.
macOS is a proprietary Unix operating system, derived from OPENSTEP for Mach and FreeBSD, which has been marketed and developed by Apple since 2001.
It is the current operating system for Apple's line of Mac computers.
As of April 2026, within the market of desktop and laptop computers, it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Microsoft Windows and ahead of all Linux distributions, including ChromeOS and SteamOS.
As of 2026, the most recent release of macOS is macOS 26 Tahoe, the 22nd major version of macOS.
ChromeOS is a proprietary operating system designed and developed by Google.
It is derived from the open-source ChromiumOS operating system, and uses the Google Chrome web browser as its principal user interface.
Ubuntu is a Linux distribution based on Debian and composed primarily of free and open-source software.
Developed by the British company Canonical and a community of contributors under a meritocratic governance model, Ubuntu is released in multiple official editions: Desktop, Server, and Core for IoT and robotic devices.
Debian is a free, general-purpose operating system developed by the Debian Project, a worldwide volunteer association founded by Ian Murdock on August 16, 1993.
It is the second-oldest Linux distribution still being developed and forms the base of many others.
Fedora Linux is a Linux distribution developed by the Fedora Project.
It was originally developed in 2003 as a continuation of the Red Hat Linux project.
It contains software distributed under various free and open-source licenses and aims to be on the leading edge of open-source technologies.
It is now the upstream source for CentOS Stream and Red Hat Enterprise Linux.
CentOS is a discontinued Linux distribution that provided a free and open-source community-supported computing platform, functionally compatible with its upstream source, Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL).
In January 2014, CentOS announced the official joining with Red Hat while staying independent from RHEL, under a new CentOS governing board.
Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) is the most recent version of the Internet Protocol (IP), the communications protocol that provides an identification and location system for computers on networks and routes traffic across the Internet.
IPv6 was developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) to deal with the long-anticipated problem of IPv4 address exhaustion, and was intended to replace IPv4.
In December 1998, IPv6 became a Draft Standard for the IETF, which subsequently ratified it as an Internet Standard on 14 July 2017.
In machine learning, supervised learning (SL) is a type of machine learning paradigm where an algorithm learns to map input data to a specific output based on example input-output pairs.
This process involves training a statistical model using labeled data, meaning each piece of input data is provided with the correct output.
The term "supervised" refers to the role of a teacher or supervisor who provides this training data, guiding the algorithm towards correct predictions.
For instance, if you want a model to identify cats in images, supervised learning would involve feeding it many images of cats (inputs) that are explicitly labeled "cat" (outputs).
Unsupervised learning is a framework in machine learning where, in contrast to supervised learning, algorithms learn patterns exclusively from unlabeled data.
Other frameworks in the spectrum of supervisions include weak- or semi-supervision, where a small portion of the data is tagged, and self-supervision.
Some researchers consider self-supervised learning a form of unsupervised learning.
DNA replication is the process by which a cell makes exact copies of its DNA.
This process occurs in all organisms and is essential to biological inheritance, cell division, and repair of damaged tissues.
DNA replication ensures that each of the newly divided daughter cells receives its own copy of each DNA molecule.
Protein folding is the physical process by which a protein, after synthesis by a ribosome as a linear chain of amino acids, changes from an unstable random coil into a more ordered three-dimensional structure.
This structure permits the protein to become biologically functional or active.
In molecular biology, RNA polymerase, or more specifically DNA-directed/dependent RNA polymerase (DdRP), is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reactions that synthesize RNA from a DNA template strand.
A ribosome is a ribonucleoprotein particle found in all cells, both prokaryotic and eukaryotic, responsible for the synthesis of proteins.
A ribosome functions as a molecular machine in the translation of strands of messenger RNA (mRNA) and production of a protein.
A ribosome links amino acids together in the order specified by the codons of mRNA molecules to form polypeptide chains.
A ribosome is made up of a large and a small subunit, each consisting of one or more ribosomal RNA molecules and many ribosomal proteins.
The ribosomes and associated molecules are also known as the translational apparatus.
A mitochondrion is an organelle found in the cells of most eukaryotes, such as animals, plants and fungi.
Mitochondria have a double membrane structure and use aerobic respiration to generate adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which is used throughout the cell as a source of chemical energy.
They were discovered by Albert von Klliker in 1857 in the voluntary muscles of insects.
The term mitochondrion, meaning "a thread-like granule", was coined by Carl Benda in 1898.
The mitochondrion is popularly nicknamed the "powerhouse of the cell", a phrase popularized by Philip Siekevitz in a 1957 Scientific American article of the same name.
A chloroplast is a type of organelle known as a plastid that conducts photosynthesis mostly in plant and algal cells.
Chloroplasts have a high concentration of chlorophyll pigments which capture the energy from sunlight, convert it to chemical energy and decomposing water to release oxygen.
The chemical energy created is then used to make sugar and other organic molecules from carbon dioxide in the Calvin cycle.
Chloroplasts carry out a number of other functions, including fatty acid synthesis, amino acid synthesis, and immune response in plants.
The number of chloroplasts per cell varies from one, in some unicellular algae, up to 100 in plants like Arabidopsis and wheat.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a part of a transportation system of the eukaryotic cell, and has many other important functions such as protein folding.
The word endoplasmic means "within the cytoplasm", and reticulum is Latin for "little net".
It is a type of organelle made up of two subunits  rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER), and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER).
The endoplasmic reticulum is found in most eukaryotic cells and forms an interconnected network of flattened, membrane-enclosed sacs known as cisternae in the RER, and tubular structures in the SER.
The membranes of the ER are continuous with the outer nuclear membrane.
The Golgi apparatus, also known as the Golgi complex, Golgi body, or simply the Golgi, is an organelle found in most eukaryotic cells.
Part of the endomembrane system in the cytoplasm, it packages proteins into membrane-bound vesicles inside the cell before the vesicles are sent to their destination.
It resides at the intersection of the secretory, lysosomal, and endocytic pathways.
It is of particular importance in processing proteins for secretion, containing a set of glycosylation enzymes that attach various sugar monomers to proteins as the proteins move through the apparatus.
A lysosome is a membrane-bound organelle that is found in all animal cells, and rarely in plant cells.
There are normally hundreds of lysosomes in the cytosol, where they function as the cell's degradation center.
Their primary responsibility is for catabolic degradation of proteins, polysaccharides and lipids into their respective building-block molecules: amino acids, monosaccharides, and free fatty acids.
The breakdown is done by various enzymes, for example proteases, glycosidases and lipases.
The cell nucleus is a membrane-bound organelle found in eukaryotic cells.
Eukaryotic cells usually have a single nucleus, but a few cell types, such as mammalian red blood cells, have no nuclei, and a few others including osteoclasts have many.
An ammeter is an instrument used to measure the current in a circuit.
Electric currents are measured in amperes (A), hence the name.
For direct measurement, the ammeter is connected in series with the circuit in which the current is to be measured.
An ammeter usually has low resistance so that it does not cause a significant voltage drop in the circuit being measured.
An oscilloscope is a type of electronic test instrument that graphically displays varying voltages of one or more signals as a function of time.
Their main purpose is capturing information on electrical signals for debugging, analysis, or characterization.
The displayed waveform can then be analyzed for properties such as amplitude, frequency, rise time, time interval, distortion, and others.
Originally, calculation of these values required manually measuring the waveform against the scales built into the screen of the instrument.
Modern digital instruments may calculate and display these properties directly.
A spectrometer is a scientific instrument used to separate and measure spectral components of a physical phenomenon.
Spectrometer is a broad term often used to describe instruments that measure a continuous variable of a phenomenon where the spectral components are somehow mixed.
In visible light a spectrometer can separate white light and measure individual narrow bands of color, called a spectrum.
A mass spectrometer measures the spectrum of the masses of the atoms or molecules present in a gas.
The first spectrometers were used to split light into an array of separate colors.
A Geiger counter is an electronic instrument for detecting and measuring ionizing radiation with the use of a GeigerMller tube.
It is widely used in applications such as radiation dosimetry, radiological protection, experimental physics and the nuclear industry.
A seismometer is an instrument that responds to ground displacement and shaking caused by quakes, volcanic eruptions, and explosions.
They are usually combined with a timing device and a recording device to form a seismograph.
The output of such a deviceformerly recorded on paper or film, now recorded and processed digitallyis a seismogram.
Such data is used to locate and characterize earthquakes, and to study the internal structure of Earth.
In meteorology, an anemometer is a device that measures wind speed and direction.
It is a common instrument used in weather stations.
The earliest known description of an anemometer was by Italian architect and author Leon Battista Alberti (14041472) in 1450.
A hygrometer is an instrument that measures humidity, that is, how much water vapor is present in the air.
Humidity measurement instruments usually rely on measurements of some other quantities, such as temperature, pressure, mass, and mechanical or electrical changes in a substance as moisture is absorbed.
By calibration and calculation, these measured quantities can be used to indicate the humidity.
Modern electronic devices use the temperature of condensation, or they sense changes in electrical capacitance or resistance.
An altimeter, or altitude meter, is an instrument used to measure the altitude of an object relative to a fixed level.
The measurement of altitude is called altimetry, which is related to the term bathymetry, the measurement of depth under water.
A speedometer or speed meter is a gauge that measures and displays the instantaneous speed of a vehicle.
Now universally fitted to motor vehicles, they started to be available as options in the early 20th century, and as standard equipment from about 1910 onwards.
Other vehicles may use devices analogous to the speedometer with different means of sensing speed, eg.
boats use a pit log, while aircraft use an airspeed indicator.
The water cycle is a biogeochemical cycle that involves the continuous change in form of water on, above and below the surface of the Earth across different reservoirs.
The mass of water on Earth remains fairly constant over time.
However, the partitioning of the water into the major reservoirs of ice, fresh water, salt water and atmospheric water is variable and depends on climatic variables.
The water moves from one reservoir to another, such as from river to ocean, or from the ocean to the atmosphere due to a variety of physical and chemical processes.
The processes that drive these movements, or fluxes, are evaporation, transpiration, condensation, precipitation, sublimation, infiltration, surface runoff, and subsurface flow.
The carbon cycle is a part of the biogeochemical cycle where carbon is exchanged among the biosphere, pedosphere, geosphere, hydrosphere, and atmosphere of Earth.
Other major biogeochemical cycles include the nitrogen cycle and the water cycle.
Carbon is the main component of biological compounds as well as a major component of many rocks such as limestone.
The carbon cycle comprises a sequence of events that are key to making Earth capable of sustaining life.
It describes the movement of carbon as it is recycled and reused throughout the biosphere, as well as long-term processes of carbon sequestration (storage) to and release from carbon sinks.
The nitrogen cycle is the biogeochemical cycle by which nitrogen is converted into multiple chemical forms as it circulates among atmospheric, terrestrial, and marine ecosystems.
The conversion of nitrogen can be carried out through both biological and physical processes.
Important processes in the nitrogen cycle include fixation, ammonification, nitrification, and denitrification.
The majority of Earth's atmosphere (78%) is atmospheric nitrogen, making it the largest source of nitrogen.
However, atmospheric nitrogen has limited availability for biological use, leading to a scarcity of usable nitrogen in many types of ecosystems.
The oxygen cycle refers to the various movements of oxygen through the Earth's atmosphere (air), biosphere (flora and fauna), hydrosphere (water bodies and glaciers) and the lithosphere (the Earth's crust).
The oxygen cycle demonstrates how free oxygen is made available in each of these regions, as well as how it is used.
It is the biogeochemical cycle of oxygen atoms between different oxidation states in ions, oxides and molecules through redox reactions within and between the spheres/reservoirs of the planet Earth.
The word oxygen in the literature typically refers to the most common oxygen allotrope, elemental/diatomic oxygen (O2), as it is a common product or reactant of many biogeochemical redox reactions within the cycle.
Processes within the oxygen cycle are considered to be biological or geological and are evaluated as either a source (O2 production) or sink (O2 consumption).
The lymphatic system, or lymphoid system, is an organ system in vertebrates that is part of the immune system and complementary to the circulatory system.
It consists of a large network of lymphatic vessels, lymph nodes, lymphoid organs, lymphatic tissue and lymph.
The Latin word for lymph, lympha, refers to the deity of fresh water, "Lympha".
The reproductive system of an organism, also known as the genital system, is the biological system made up of all the anatomical organs involved in sexual reproduction and asexual reproduction.
Many non-living substances such as fluids, hormones, and pheromones are also important accessories to the reproductive system.
Unlike most organ systems, the sexes of differentiated species often have significant differences.
These differences allow for a combination of genetic material between two individuals, which allows for the possibility of greater genetic fitness of the offspring.
The urinary system, also known as the urinary tract or renal system, is a part of the excretory system of vertebrates.
In humans and placental mammals, it consists of the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and the urethra.
The purpose of the urinary system is to eliminate urine from the body, regulate blood volume and blood pressure, control levels of electrolytes and metabolites, and regulate blood pH.
The kidneys have an extensive blood supply via the renal arteries which leave the kidneys via the renal vein.
Each kidney consists of functional units called nephrons.
Plankton are organisms that drift in water but are unable to actively propel themselves against currents.
Marine plankton include drifting organisms that inhabit the saltwater of oceans and the brackish waters of estuaries.
Freshwater plankton are similar to marine plankton, but are found in lakes and rivers.
An individual plankton organism in the plankton is called a plankter.
Krill (Euphausiids) are small and exclusively marine crustaceans of the order Euphausiacea, found in all of the world's oceans.
The name "krill" comes from the Norwegian word krill, meaning "small fry of fish", which is also often attributed to species of fish.
A seahorse is any of 46 species of small marine bony fish in the genus Hippocampus.
The genus name comes from the Ancient Greek hippkampos (), itself from hppos () meaning "horse" and kmpos () meaning "sea monster" or "sea animal".
Having a head and neck suggestive of a horse, seahorses also feature segmented bony armour, an upright posture and a curled prehensile tail.
Along with the pipefishes and seadragons they form the family Syngnathidae.
Manta rays are large rays belonging to the genus Mobula.
Three species are known: M.
birostris, the largest at 7m (23ft) in width, M.
yarae, which reaches 6m (20ft), and M.
alfredi, the smallest at 5.5m (18ft).
Sea turtles, sometimes called marine turtles, are reptiles of the order Testudines and of the suborder Cryptodira.
The seven existing species of sea turtles are the flatback, green, hawksbill, leatherback, loggerhead, Kemp's ridley, and olive ridley.
Five of the seven species are listed as threatened with extinction globally on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.
The remaining two are not considered to be threatened with extinction, one of which, the flatback turtle, is found only in the waters of Australia, Papua New Guinea, and Indonesia.
The blue whale is a species of baleen whale and the largest marine mammal in the rorqual family Balaenopteridae.
Reaching a maximum confirmed length of 29.930.5m (98100ft) and weighing up to 190200t, it is the largest animal known to have ever existed.
The blue whale's long and slender body can be of various shades of greyish-blue on its upper surface and somewhat lighter underneath.
Four subspecies are recognized: B.
The orca, or killer whale, is a toothed whale and the largest member of the oceanic dolphin family.
The only extant species in the genus Orcinus, it is recognizable by its distinct pigmentation; being mostly black on top, white on the bottom and having recognizable white eye patches.
A cosmopolitan species, it inhabits a wide range of marine environments, from Arctic to Antarctic regions to tropical seas, but is more commonly documented in temperate or cooler coastal waters.
Scientists have proposed dividing the global population into races, subspecies, or possibly even species.
The great white shark, also known as the white shark, white pointer, or great white, is a large shark.
It is closely related to the mako sharks, the porbeagle, and the salmon shark.
It is a robustly built species with a grayish upperside and a white underside.
The white shark is one of the largest living shark and fish species, though it is still smaller than the whale shark and basking shark.
It has about 300 triangular, serrated teeth that are continuously replaced.
The anglerfish are ray-finned fish in the order Lophiiformes.
Both the order's common and scientific name comes from the characteristic mode of predation, in which a modified dorsal fin ray acts as a lure for prey.
The modified fin ray, with the very tip being the esca and the length of the structure the illicium, is adapted to attract specific prey items across the families of anglerfish by using different luring methods.
They do not form a single natural group or clade, but have convergently evolved multiple times from the ancestral decapod body plan through carcinisation, the process of creating this set of characteristics.
As a group, they are thus polyphyletic, meaning they have multiple evolutionary origins.
The Lampyridae are a family of elateroid beetles with more than 2,400 described species, many of which are light-emitting.
They are soft-bodied beetles commonly called fireflies, lightning bugs, or glowworms for their conspicuous production of light, mainly during twilight, to attract mates.
The type species is Lampyris noctiluca, the common glow-worm of Europe.
Light production in the Lampyridae is thought to have originated as a warning signal that the larvae were distasteful.
This ability to create light was then co-opted as a mating signal and, in a further development, adult female fireflies of the genus Photuris mimic the flash pattern of the Photinus beetle to trap their males as prey.
Tyrannosaurus is a genus of large theropod dinosaur.
The type species Tyrannosaurus rex, often shortened to T.
rex or colloquially T-Rex, is one of the best represented theropods.
It lived throughout what is now western North America, on what was then an island continent known as Laramidia.
Tyrannosaurus had a much wider range than other tyrannosaurids.
Triceratops is a genus of chasmosaurine ceratopsian dinosaur that lived during the late Maastrichtian age of the Late Cretaceous period, about 69 to 66 million years ago on the island continent of Laramidia, now forming western North America.
It was one of the last-known non-avian dinosaurs and lived until the CretaceousPaleogene extinction event 66 million years ago.
The name Triceratops, which means 'three-horned face', is derived from the Ancient Greek words -, meaning "three", , meaning "horn", and , meaning "face".
Velociraptor is a genus of small dromaeosaurid dinosaurs that lived in Asia during the Late Cretaceous epoch, about 75 million to 71 million years ago (Mya).
Two species are currently recognized, although others have been assigned in the past.
The type species is V.
mongoliensis, named and described in 1924.
Fossils of this species have been discovered in the Djadochta Formation, Mongolia.
Stegosaurus is a genus of extinct herbivorous four-legged armored dinosaurs from the Late Jurassic, characterized by the distinctive kite-shaped upright plates along their backs and spikes on their tails.
Fossils of the genus have been found in the western United States and in Portugal, where they are found in Kimmeridgian- to Tithonian-aged strata, dating to between 155 and 145million years ago.
Of the species that have been classified in the upper Morrison Formation of the western US, only three are universally recognized: S.
Brachiosaurus is a genus of sauropod dinosaur that lived in North America during the Late Jurassic, about 155.6 to 145.5 million years ago.
It was first described by American paleontologist Elmer S.
Riggs in 1903 from fossils found in the Colorado River valley in western Colorado, United States.
Riggs named the dinosaur Brachiosaurus altithorax; the generic name is Greek for "arm lizard", in reference to its proportionately long arms, and the specific name means "deep chest".
Brachiosaurus is estimated to have been between 18 and 22 meters long; body mass estimates of the subadult holotype specimen range from 28.3 to 46.9 metric tons.
Pteranodon (; from Ancient Greek pteron 'wing', an- 'without', and odon 'tooth' is a genus of pterosaur that included some of the largest known flying reptiles, with P.
longiceps having a wingspan of over 6m.
They lived during the late Cretaceous geological period of North America in present-day Kansas, Nebraska, Wyoming, South Dakota and Alabama.
More fossil specimens of Pteranodon have been found than any other pterosaur, with about 1,200 specimens known to science, many of them well preserved with nearly complete skulls and articulated skeletons.
It was an important part of the animal community in the Western Interior Seaway.
Diplodocus is an extinct genus of diplodocid sauropod dinosaurs known from the Late Jurassic of North America.
The first fossils of Diplodocus were discovered in 1877 by S.
Ankylosaurus is a genus of armored dinosaur.
Its fossils have been found in geological formations dating to the very end of the Cretaceous Period, about 70-66 million years ago, in western North America, making it among the last of the non-avian dinosaurs.
It was named by Barnum Brown in 1908; it is monotypic, containing only A.
The generic name means "fused" or "bent lizard", and the specific name means "great belly".
Spinosaurus is a genus of large spinosaurid theropod dinosaurs that lived in what is now North Africa during the Cenomanian stage of the Late Cretaceous period, about 100 to 94 million years ago.
The genus was known first from Egyptian remains discovered in 1912 and described by German palaeontologist Ernst Stromer in 1915.
The original remains were destroyed in World War II, but additional material came to light in the early 21st century.
It is unclear whether one or two species are represented in the fossils reported in the scientific literature.
Parasaurolophus is a genus of hadrosaurid "duck-billed" dinosaur that lived in what is now western North America and possibly Asia during the Late Cretaceous period, about 76.573 million years ago.
It was a large herbivore that could reach over 9 metres (30ft) long and weigh over 5 metric tons, and were able to move as a biped and a quadruped.
Three species are universally recognized: P.
tubicen, and the short-crested P.
Determinism is the metaphysical view that all events within the universe can occur only in one possible way.
Deterministic theories throughout the history of philosophy have developed from diverse and sometimes overlapping motives and considerations.
Like eternalism, determinism focuses on particular events rather than the future as a concept.
Determinism is often contrasted with free will, although some philosophers argue that the two are compatible.
The antonym of determinism is indeterminism, the view that events are not deterministically caused.
Because there are different types of idealism, it is difficult to define the term uniformly.
A subsidy, subvention or government incentive is a type of government expenditure which redistributes from tax payers to individuals, households, or businesses.
Subsidies take various forms, such as direct government expenditures, tax incentives, soft loans, price support, and government provision of goods and services.
For instance, the government may distribute direct payment subsidies to individuals and households during an economic downturn in order to help its citizens pay their bills and to stimulate economic activity.
Tax compliance refers to policy actions and individual behavior aimed at ensuring that taxpayers are paying the right amount of tax at the right time and securing the correct tax allowances and tax relief.
The shimmery appearance of silk is due to the triangular prism-like structure of the silk fiber, which causes silk cloth to refract incoming light at different angles, thus producing different colors.
Linen is a textile made from the bast fibers of the flax plant.
Linen cloth has been produced since ancient times primarily for use in clothing and household items.
It can be used to make a wide range of products.
Along with bamboo, hemp is among the fastest growing plants on Earth.
It was also one of the first plants to be spun into usable fiber 50,000 years ago.
It can be refined into a variety of commercial items, including paper, rope, textiles, clothing, biodegradable plastics, paint, insulation, biofuel, food, and animal feed.
Acrylic fibers are synthetic fibers made from a polymer (polyacrylonitrile) with an average molecular weight of ~100,000, about 1900 monomer units.
For a fiber to be called "acrylic" in the US, the polymer must contain at least 85% acrylonitrile monomer.
Typical comonomers are vinyl acetate or methyl acrylate.
DuPont created the first acrylic fibers in 1941 and trademarked them under the name Orlon.
It was first developed in the mid-1940s but was not produced in large quantities until the 1950s.
Spandex, Lycra, or elastane is a synthetic fiber known for its exceptional elasticity.
It is a polyether-polyurea copolymer that was invented in 1958 by chemist Joseph Shivers at DuPont.
Rayon, also called viscose, is a semi-synthetic fiber made from natural sources of regenerated cellulose, such as wood and related agricultural products.
It has the same molecular structure as cellulose.
Many types and grades of rayon fibers and films exist.
Some imitate the feel and texture of natural fibers such as silk, wool, cotton, and linen.
It can be woven or knitted to make textiles for clothing and other purposes.
Cashmere wool, usually simply known as cashmere, is a fiber obtained from cashmere goats, pashmina goats, and some other breeds of goat.
It has been used to make yarn, textiles and clothing for hundreds of years.
Cashmere is closely associated with the Kashmir shawl, the word "cashmere" deriving from an anglicization of Kashmir, when the Kashmir shawl reached Europe in the 19th century.
Both the soft undercoat and the guard hairs may be used; the softer hair is reserved for textiles, while the coarse guard hair is used for brushes and other non-apparel purposes.
Cashmere is a hygroscopic fiber, absorbing and releasing water from the air based on the surrounding environment.
The Louvre is a national art museum in Paris, France.
It is located on the Right Bank of the Seine in the city's 1st arrondissement (district) and home to some of the most canonical works of Western art, including the Mona Lisa, Venus de Milo, and Winged Victory.
The museum is housed in the Louvre Palace, originally built in the late 12th to 13thcentury under Philip II.
Remnants of the Medieval Louvre fortress are visible in the basement of the museum.
Due to urban expansion, the fortress eventually lost its defensive function, and in 1546 Francis I converted it into the primary residence of the French kings.
The British Museum is a public museum dedicated to human history, art and culture located in the Bloomsbury area of London.
Its permanent collection of eight million works is the largest in the world.
It documents the story of human culture from its beginnings to the present.
Established in 1753, the British Museum was the world's first public national museum.
In 2025, the museum received 6,440,120 visitors and was the second most visited attraction in the United Kingdom.
The Smithsonian Institution is a group of museums, education and research centers, created by the United States federal government "for the increase and diffusion of knowledge".
Founded on August 10, 1846, it operates as a trust instrumentality and is not formally a part of any of the three branches of the federal government.
The institution is named after its founding donor, British scientist James Smithson.
It was originally organized as the United States National Museum, but that name ceased to exist administratively in 1967.
The Vatican Museums are the public museums of the Vatican City.
They display works from the immense collection amassed by the Catholic Church and the papacy throughout the centuries, including several of the best-known Roman sculptures and most important masterpieces of Renaissance art in the world.
The museums contain roughly 70,000 works, of which 20,000 are on display, and currently employ 640 people who work in 40 different administrative, scholarly, and restoration departments.
Notre-Dame de Paris, often referred to simply as Notre-Dame, is a medieval Catholic cathedral on the le de la Cit, in the 4th arrondissement of Paris, France.
It is the cathedral church of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Paris.
Hagia Sophia, officially the Hagia Sophia Grand Mosque, is a mosque and a major cultural and historical site in Istanbul, Turkey.
It was formerly a church (3601453) and a museum (19352020).
The last of three church buildings to be successively erected on the site by the Eastern Roman Empire, it was completed in AD 537, becoming the world's largest interior space and among the first to employ a fully pendentive dome.
It is considered the epitome of Byzantine architecture and is said to have "changed the history of architecture".
From its dedication in 360 until 1453, Hagia Sophia served as the cathedral of Constantinople in the Byzantine liturgical tradition, except for the period 12041261 when the Latin Crusaders installed their own hierarchy.
The Volga is the longest river in Europe and the longest endorheic basin river in the world.
Situated in Russia, it flows through Central Russia to Southern Russia and into the Caspian Sea.
The Volga has a length of 3,531km (2,194mi), and a catchment area of 1,360,000km2 (530,000sqmi).
It is also Europe's largest river in terms of average discharge at delta  between 8,000 and 8,500 cubic metres per second  and of drainage basin.
It is widely regarded as the national river of Russia.
The Euphrates is the longest and one of the most historically important rivers of West Asia.
Together with the Tigris, it is one of the two defining rivers of Mesopotamia.
Originating in Turkey, the Euphrates flows through Syria and Iraq to join the Tigris in the Shatt al-Arab in Iraq, which empties into the Persian Gulf.
Mount Kilimanjaro is a large dormant volcano in Tanzania.
It is the highest mountain in Africa and the highest free-standing mountain above sea level in the world, at 5,895m (19,341ft) above sea level and 4,900m (16,100ft) above its plateau base.
It is also the highest volcano in the Eastern Hemisphere and the fourth most prominent peak on Earth.
Denali, federally designated as Mount McKinley, is the highest mountain peak in North America, with a summit elevation of 20,310 feet (6,190m) above sea level.
It is the tallest mountain in the world from base to peak on land, measuring 18,000ft (5,500m).
With a topographic prominence of 20,156 feet (6,144m) and a topographic isolation of 4,621.1 miles (7,436.9km), Denali is the third most prominent and third-most isolated peak on Earth, after Mount Everest and Aconcagua.
Located in the Alaska Range in the interior of the U.S.
state of Alaska, Denali is the centerpiece of Denali National Park and Preserve.
Aconcagua is a mountain in the Principal Cordillera of the Andes range, located in Mendoza Province, Argentina.
With a summit elevation of 6,967.15 metres, it is the highest mountain in the Americas, the highest outside Asia, and the highest peak in both the Western and Southern Hemispheres.
It is the second-most topographically prominent peak in the world and one of the Seven Summits, the highest mountains on each of the seven continents.
Mount Fuji  is an active stratovolcano located on the Japanese island of Honshu, with a summit elevation of 3,776.24m.
It is the highest mountain in Japan, the second-highest volcano on any Asian island, and the seventh-highest peak of an island on Earth.
Mount Fuji last erupted from 1707 to 1708.
The Matterhorn is a mountain of the Alps, straddling the main watershed and border between Switzerland and Italy.
It is a large, near-symmetric pyramidal peak in the extended Monte Rosa area of the Pennine Alps, whose summit is 4,478 metres (14,692ft) above sea level, making it one of the highest summits in the Alps and Europe.
Sometimes referred to as the "Mountain of Mountains", the Matterhorn has become an indelible emblem of Switzerland and of the Alps as a whole.
It has also been described as the most beautiful mountain in the world and has been claimed to be the most photographed mountain in the world.
Mount Olympus is an extensive massif near the Thermaic Gulf of the Aegean Sea, in Greece, located on the border between Thessaly and Macedonia, between the regional units of Larissa and Pieria, about 80km (50mi) southwest from Thessaloniki.
Mount Olympus has 52 peaks and deep gorges.
The highest peak, Mytikas, meaning "nose", rises to 2,917.727 metres (9,572.60ft) and is the highest peak in Greece, and one of the highest peaks in Europe in terms of topographic prominence.
Table Mountain is a flat-topped mountain forming a prominent landmark overlooking the city of Cape Town in South Africa.
Mount Vesuvius is a sommastratovolcano located on the Gulf of Naples in Campania, Italy, about 9km (5.6mi) east of Naples and a short distance from the shore.
It is one of several volcanoes forming the Campanian volcanic arc.
Vesuvius consists of a large cone partially encircled by the steep rim of a summit caldera, resulting from the collapse of an earlier, much higher structure.
Mount Etna, or simply Etna, is an active stratovolcano on the east coast of Sicily, Italy, in the Metropolitan City of Catania, between the cities of Messina and Catania.
It is located above the convergent plate margin between the African Plate and the Eurasian Plate.
It is one of the tallest active volcanoes in Europe, and the tallest peak in Italy south of the Alps with a current height of 3,403m (11,165ft), though this varies with summit eruptions.
For instance, in 2021 the southeastern crater reached a height of 3,357m (11,014ft), but was then surpassed by the Voragine crater after the summer 2024 eruptions.
It is the world's largest island and lies between the Arctic and Atlantic oceans, east of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago.
It shares a small 1.2-kilometre (0.75mi) border with Canada on Hans Island.
Borneo is the third-largest island in the world, with an area of 748,168km2 (288,869sqmi), and population of 23,053,723.
Situated at the geographic centre of Maritime Southeast Asia, it is one of the Greater Sunda Islands, located north of Java, west of Sulawesi, and east of Sumatra.
The island is crossed by the equator, which divides it roughly in half.
In Indonesia, the island is also known as Kalimantan, which is also the name of the Indonesian region located on the island.
Honshu , historically known as Akitsushima  or Hondo, is the largest of Japan's four main islands.
It lies between the Pacific Ocean (east) and the Sea of Japan (west).
It is the seventh-largest island in the world, and the second-most populous after the Indonesian island of Java.
Luzon is the largest and most populous island in the Philippines.
Located in the northern portion of the Philippine archipelago, it is the economic and political center of the nation, being home to the country's capital city, Manila, as well as Quezon City, the country's most populous city.
With a population of 64.3 million as of 2024, it contains 55 percent of the country's total population and is the 4th most populous island in the world.
It is the 15th largest island in the world by land area.
The Patagonian Desert, also known as the Patagonian Steppe, is the largest desert in Argentina and is the eighth-largest desert in the world by area, occupying approx.
673,000 square kilometres.
It is located primarily in Argentina and is bounded by the Andes, to its west, and the Atlantic Ocean to its east, in the region of Patagonia, southern Argentina and areas of Chile.
To the north the desert grades into the Cuyo Region and the Monte.
The central parts of the steppe are dominated by shrubby and herbaceous plant species albeit to the west, where precipitation is higher, bushes are replaced by grasses.
Lake Baikal is a rift lake and the deepest lake in the world.
It is situated in southern Siberia, Russia, between the federal subjects of Irkutsk Oblast to the northwest and the Republic of Buryatia to the southeast.
Lake Superior is a lake in central North America.
The northernmost, westernmost, and highest of the Great Lakes, Lake Superior straddles the CanadaUnited States border with the Canadian province of Ontario to the north and east and the U.S.
states of Minnesota to the west and Michigan and Wisconsin to the south.
It is the largest freshwater lake in the world by surface area and the third-largest freshwater lake by volume.
It drains into Lake Huron via St.
Lake Victoria is one of the African Great Lakes.
With a surface area of approximately 59,947km2 (23,146sqmi), Lake Victoria is Africa's largest lake by area, the world's largest tropical lake, and the world's second-largest fresh water lake by surface area after Lake Superior in North America.
In terms of volume, Lake Victoria is the world's ninth-largest continental lake, containing about 2,424km3 (1.965109acreft) of water.
Lake Victoria occupies a shallow depression in Africa.
The lake has an average depth of 40m (130ft) and a maximum depth of 8081m (262266ft).
The Caspian Sea is the world's largest inland body of water, described as the world's largest lake and usually referred to as a full-fledged sea.
An endorheic basin, it is situated in both Europe and Asia: east of the Caucasus, west of the broad steppe of Central Asia, south of the fertile plains of Southern Russia in Eastern Europe, and north of the mountainous Iranian Plateau.
It covers a surface area of 371,000km2 (143,244sqmi), an area similar to Japan, with a volume of 78,200km3 (19,000cumi).
It has a salinity of approximately 1.2%, about a third of the salinity of average seawater.
It is bounded by Kazakhstan to the northeast, Russia to the northwest, Azerbaijan to the southwest, Iran to the south, and Turkmenistan to the southeast.
Lake Titicaca is a large lake in the Andes mountains on the border of Bolivia and Peru.
It is often called the highest navigable lake in the world.
It is often listed as a freshwater lake, though its waters are slightly brackish.
Titicaca is the largest lake in South America, both in terms of the volume of water and surface area.
It is the 18th largest lake in the world.
The Great Salt Lake is the largest saltwater lake in the Western Hemisphere and the eighth-largest terminal lake in the world.
It lies in the northern part of the U.S.
state of Utah and has a substantial impact upon the local climate, particularly through lake-effect snow.
It is a remnant of Lake Bonneville, a prehistoric body of water that covered much of western Utah.
Lake Tanganyika is an African Great Lake.
It is the world's second-largest freshwater lake by volume and the second deepest, in both cases after Lake Baikal in Siberia.
It is the world's longest freshwater lake.
It is also the 6th largest lake by area.
The lake is shared among four countriesTanzania, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, and Zambiawith Tanzania (46%) and the DRC (40%) possessing the majority of the lake.
Lake Malawi, also known as Lake Nyasa in Tanzania and Lago Niassa in Mozambique, is an African Great Lake and the southernmost lake in the East African Rift system, located between Malawi, Mozambique and Tanzania.
Lake Michigan is one of the five Great Lakes of North America.
It is the second-largest of the Great Lakes by volume and depth after Lake Superior and the third-largest by surface area, after Lake Superior and Lake Huron.
The Dead Sea, also known by other names, is a landlocked salt lake bordered by Jordan to the east, the West Bank to the west and Israel to the southwest.
It lies in the endorheic basin of the Jordan Rift Valley, and its main tributary is the Jordan River.
It is also known as the Canadian Falls.
The smaller American Falls and Bridal Veil Falls lie within the United States.
Solitaire, patience, or card solitaire refer to a genre of card games whose common feature is that the aim is to arrange the cards in some systematic order or, in a few cases, to pair them off in order to discard them.
Most are intended for play by a single player, but there are varieties for two or more players.
Karate (), also karate-do , is a martial art developed in the Ryukyu Kingdom.
It developed from the indigenous Ryukyuan martial arts under the influence of Chinese martial arts.
While modern karate is primarily a striking art that uses punches and kicks, traditional karate training also employs throwing and joint locking techniques.
A karate practitioner is called a karate-ka ().
Brazilian jiu-jitsu, often abbreviated to BJJ, is a self-defense system, martial art, and combat sport based on grappling, ground fighting, and submission holds.
Wing Chun (Cantonese) or Yong Chun (Mandarin) is a concept-based martial art, a form of Southern Chinese kung fu, and a close-quarters system of self-defense.
It is a martial arts style characterized by its focus on close-quarters hand-to-hand combat, rapid-fire punches, and straightforward efficiency.
It has a philosophy that emphasizes capturing and sticking to an opponent's centerline.
This is accomplished using simultaneous attack and defense, tactile sensitivity, and using an opponent's force against them.
In music, a sonata is a piece that consists of 3 or 4 movements that can be for different musical instruments.
The term evolved through the history of music, designating a variety of forms until the Classical era, when it took on increasing importance.
Sonata is a vague term, with varying meanings depending on the context and time period.
By the early 19th century it came to represent a principle of composing large-scale works.
It was applied to most instrumental genres and regardedalongside the fugueas one of two fundamental methods of organizing, interpreting and analyzing concert music.
Symphonies are notated in a musical score, which contains all the instrument parts.
Orchestral musicians play from parts which contain just the notated music for their own instrument.
A concerto is, from the late Baroque era, mostly understood as an instrumental composition, written for one or more soloists accompanied by an orchestra or other ensemble.
The typical three-movement structure, a slow movement preceded and followed by fast movements, became a standard from the early 18th century.
In classical music, a fugue is a contrapuntal, polyphonic compositional technique in two or more voices, built on a subject that is introduced at the beginning in imitation, which recurs frequently throughout the course of the composition.
It is not to be confused with a fuguing tune, which is a style of song popularized by and mostly limited to early American music and West Gallery music.
A fugue usually has three main sections: an exposition, a development, and a final entry that contains the return of the subject in the fugue's tonic key.
Fugues can also have episodes, which are parts of the fugue where new material often based on the subject is heard; a stretto, when the fugue's subject overlaps itself in different voices, or a recapitulation.
A popular compositional technique in the Baroque era, the fugue was fundamental in showing mastery of harmony and tonality as it presented counterpoint.
In music, a canon is a contrapuntal (counterpoint-based) compositional technique that employs a melody with one or more imitations of the melody played after a given duration.
The initial melody is called the leader, while the imitative melody, which is played in a different voice, is called the follower.
The follower must imitate the leader, either as an exact replication of its rhythms and intervals or some transformation thereof.
In music theory, counterpoint is the relationship of two or more simultaneous musical lines that are harmonically dependent on each other, yet independent in rhythm and melodic contour.
The term originates from the Latin punctus contra punctum meaning "point against point", i.e.
In music, modulation is the change from one tonality to another.
This may or may not be accompanied by a change in key signature.
Modulations articulate or create the structure or form of many pieces, as well as add interest.
Treatment of a non-tonic chord as a temporary tonic, for less than a phrase, is considered tonicization.Modulation is the essential part of the art.
Without it there is little music, for a piece derives its true beauty not from the large number of fixed modes which it embraces but rather from the subtle fabric of its modulation.
In Western musical theory, a cadence is the end of a phrase in which the melody or harmony creates a sense of full or partial resolution, especially in music of the 16th century onwards.
A harmonic cadence is a progression of two or more chords that concludes a phrase, section, or piece of music.
A rhythmic cadence is a characteristic rhythmic pattern that indicates the end of a phrase.
A cadence can be labeled "weak" or "strong" depending on the impression of finality it gives.
the same succession of whole tones and semitones and remaining melodic intervals.
The comedy film is a film genre that emphasizes humor.
These films are designed to amuse audiences and make them laugh.
Films in this genre typically have a happy ending, with dark comedy being an exception to this rule.
Comedy is one of the oldest genres in film, and it is derived from classical comedy in theatre.
Some of the earliest silent films were slapstick comedies, which often relied on visual depictions, such as sight gags and pratfalls, so they could be enjoyed without requiring sound.
Vitamin A is a fat-soluble vitamin that is an essential nutrient.
The term "vitamin A" encompasses a group of chemically related organic compounds that includes retinol, retinyl esters, and several provitamin (precursor) carotenoids, most notably -carotene (beta-carotene).
Vitamin A has multiple functions: growth during embryo development, maintaining the immune system, and healthy vision.
For aiding vision specifically, it combines with the protein opsin to form rhodopsin, the light-absorbing molecule necessary for both low-light and color vision.
B vitamins are a class of water-soluble vitamins that play important roles in cell metabolism and synthesis of red blood cells.
They are a chemically diverse class of compounds.
Vitamin C or ascorbate is a water-soluble vitamin found in citrus and other fruits, berries and vegetables.
It is found as a form of ascorbic acid.
It is an essential nutrient involved in the repair of tissue, the formation of collagen, and the enzymatic production of certain neurotransmitters.
It is required for the functioning of several enzymes and is important for immune system function.
It also functions as an antioxidant.
Vitamin D is a group of structurally related, fat-soluble compounds responsible for increasing intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphate, along with numerous other biological functions.
In humans, the most important compounds within this group are vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) and vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol).
Vitamin E is a group of eight compounds related in molecular structure that includes four tocopherols and four tocotrienols.
The tocopherols function as fat-soluble antioxidants which may help protect cell membranes from reactive oxygen species.
Vitamin K is a family of structurally similar, fat-soluble vitamers found in foods and marketed as dietary supplements.
The human body requires vitaminK for post-synthesis modification of certain proteins that are required for blood coagulation and for controlling binding of calcium in bones and other tissues.
The complete synthesis involves final modification of these so-called "Glaproteins" by the enzyme gamma-glutamyl carboxylase that uses vitaminK as a cofactor.
Iron is a chemical element; it has symbol Fe and atomic number 26.
It is a metal that belongs to the first transition series and group 8 of the periodic table.
It is, by mass, the most common element on Earth, forming much of Earth's outer and inner core.
It is the fourth most abundant element in the Earth's crust.
In its metallic state it was mainly deposited by meteorites.
Calcium is a chemical element; it has symbol Ca and atomic number 20.
As an alkaline earth metal, calcium is a reactive metal that forms a dark oxide-nitride layer when exposed to air.
Its physical and chemical properties are most similar to its heavier homologues strontium and barium.
It is the fifth most abundant element in Earth's crust, and the third most abundant metal, after iron and aluminium.
The most common calcium compound on Earth is calcium carbonate, found in limestone and the fossils of early sea life; gypsum, anhydrite, fluorite, and apatite are also sources of calcium.
Magnesium is a chemical element; it has symbol Mg and atomic number 12.
It is a shiny gray metal having a low density, low melting point, and high chemical reactivity.
Like the other alkaline earth metals, it occurs naturally only in combination with other elements and almost always has an oxidation state of +2.
It reacts readily with air to form a thin passivation coating of magnesium oxide that inhibits further corrosion of the metal.
The free metal burns with a brilliant-white light.
Zinc is a chemical element; it has symbol Zn and atomic number 30.
It is a slightly brittle metal at room temperature and has a shiny blue whitish appearance when surface oxidation is removed.
It is the first element in group 12 (IIB) of the periodic table.
Zinc is the 24th most abundant element in Earth's crust, with an average concentration of 70 grams per ton.
Zinc also has five stable isotopes; the most abundant of which, Zn-64, comprises nearly half of zinc's total abundance.
Potassium is a chemical element; it has symbol K and atomic number19.
It is a silvery white metal that is soft enough to easily cut with a knife.
Potassium metal reacts rapidly with atmospheric oxygen to form flaky white potassium peroxide in only seconds of exposure.
It was first isolated from potash, the ashes of plants, from which its name derives.
In the periodic table, potassium is one of the alkali metals, all of which have a single valence electron in the outer electron shell, which is easily removed to create anion with a positive charge.
Sodium is a chemical element; it has symbolNa and atomic number11.
It is a soft, silvery-white, highly reactive metal.
Sodium is an alkali metal, being in group 1 of the periodic table.
Its only stable isotope is 23Na.
The free metal does not occur in nature and must be prepared from compounds.
A carbohydrate is a sugar (saccharide) or a sugar derivative.
For the simplest carbohydrates, the carbon-to-hydrogen-to-oxygen atomic ratio is 1:2:1, i.e.
they are often represented by the empirical formula (CH2O)n.
Together with amino acids, fats, and nucleic acids, the carbohydrates are one of the major families of biomolecules.
Cholesterol is the principal sterol of all animals, distributed in body tissues, especially the brain and spinal cord, and in animal fats and oils.
Measles is a highly contagious, vaccine-preventable infectious disease caused by measles virus.
Other names include morbilli, rubeola, 9-day measles, red measles, and English measles.
Typhoid fever, also known as typhoid, is an orally contracted disease caused by Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi bacteria, also called Salmonella Typhi.
Symptoms vary from mild to severe, and usually begin six to 30 days after exposure.
Often there is a gradual onset of a high fever over several days.
This is commonly accompanied by weakness, abdominal pain, constipation, headaches, and mild vomiting.
Some people develop a skin rash with rose colored spots.
It is an orbital research station, where scientific experiments in microgravity are conducted and the space environment is studied.
Since 2 November 2000, it has hosted the longest continuous presence of humans in space.
Pioneer 10 is a NASA space probe launched in 1972 that completed the first mission to the planet Jupiter.
Pioneer 10 became the first of five artificial objects to achieve the escape velocity needed to leave the Solar System.
This space exploration project was conducted by the NASA Ames Research Center in California.
The space probe was manufactured by TRW Inc.
Participants were led to believe that they were assisting in a fictitious experiment, in which they had to administer electric shocks to a "learner".
These fake electric shocks gradually increased to levels that would have been fatal had they been real.
The Fermi paradox is the apparent inconsistency between the lack of conclusive evidence of extraterrestrial civilizations and the apparently high likelihood of their existence.
In physics, the twin paradox is a thought experiment in special relativity involving twins, one of whom takes a space voyage at relativistic speeds and returns home to find that the twin who remained on Earth has aged more.
However, this scenario can be resolved within the standard framework of special relativity: the travelling twin's trajectory involves two different inertial frames, one for the outbound journey and one for the inbound journey.
Another way to understand the paradox is to realise the travelling twin is undergoing acceleration, thus becoming a non-inertial observer.
In both views there is no symmetry between the spacetime paths of the twins.
A temporal paradox, time paradox, or time travel paradox, is an apparent or actual contradiction associated with the idea of time travel or other foreknowledge of the future.
Temporal paradoxes arise from circumstances involving hypothetical time travel to the past.
They are often employed to demonstrate the impossibility of time travel.
Temporal paradoxes fall into three broad groups: bootstrap paradoxes, consistency paradoxes, and free will causality paradoxes exemplified by the Newcomb paradox.
Zeno's paradoxes are a series of philosophical arguments presented by the ancient Greek philosopher Zeno of Elea, primarily known through the works of Plato, Aristotle, and later commentators like Simplicius of Cilicia.
Zeno devised these paradoxes to support his teacher Parmenides's philosophy of monism, which posits that despite people's sensory experiences, reality is singular and unchanging.
The paradoxes famously challenge the notions of plurality, motion, space, and time by suggesting they lead to logical contradictions.
This contradicts the observed darkness and non-uniformity of the night sky.
Modern cosmological models do not make all of these assumptions.
In probability theory, the birthday problem asks for the probability that, in a set of n randomly chosen people, at least two will share the same birthday.
The birthday paradox is the counterintuitive fact that only 23 people are needed for that probability to exceed 50%.
A circle is a shape consisting of all points in a plane that are at a given distance from a given point, the centre.
The distance between any point of the circle and the centre is called the radius.
The length of a line segment connecting two points on the circle and passing through the centre is called the diameter.
A circle bounds a region of the plane called a disc.
In mathematics, an ellipse is a plane curve surrounding two focal points, such that for all points on the curve, the sum of both distances to the two focal points is a constant.
It generalizes a circle, which is the special type of ellipse in which the two focal points are the same.
The elongation of an ellipse is measured by its eccentricity , a number ranging from  to .
In mathematics, a parabola is a plane curve which is mirror-symmetrical and is approximately U-shaped.
It fits several superficially different mathematical descriptions, which can all be proved to define exactly the same curves.
A helix is a shape like a cylindrical coil spring or the thread of a machine screw.
It is a type of smooth skew curve with tangent lines at a constant angle to a fixed axis.
Helices are important in biology, as the DNA molecule is formed as two intertwined helices, and many proteins have helical substructures, known as alpha helices.
The word helix comes from the Greek word , "twisted, curved".
A "filled-in" helix  for example, a "spiral" (helical) ramp  is a surface called a helicoid.
In geometry, a tesseract or 4-cube is a four-dimensional hypercube, analogous to a two-dimensional square and a three-dimensional cube.
Just as the perimeter of the square consists of four edges and the surface of the cube consists of six square faces, the hypersurface of the tesseract consists of eight cubical cells, meeting at right angles.
The tesseract is one of the six convex regular 4-polytopes.
Big O notation is a mathematical notation that describes the approximate size of a function on a domain.
Big O is a member of a family of notations invented by the German mathematicians Paul Bachmann and Edmund Landau and expanded by others, collectively called BachmannLandau notation.
The letter O stands for Ordnung, that is, the order of approximation.
NoSQL refers to a type of database design that stores and retrieves data differently from the traditional table-based structure of relational databases.
Unlike relational databases, which organize data into rows and columns like a spreadsheet, NoSQL databases use a single data structuresuch as keyvalue pairs, wide columns, graphs, or documentsto hold information.
Since this non-relational design does not require a fixed schema, it scales easily to manage large, often unstructured datasets.
NoSQL systems are sometimes called "Not only SQL" because they can support SQL-like query languages or work alongside SQL databases in polyglot-persistent setups, where multiple database types are combined.
Non-relational databases date back to the late 1960s, but the term "NoSQL" emerged in the early 2000s, spurred by the needs of Web 2.0 companies like social media platforms.
In computer science, ACID is a set of properties of database transactions intended to guarantee data validity despite errors, power failures, and other mishaps.
For example, a transfer of funds from one bank account to another, involving multiple changes such as debiting one account and crediting another, is a single transaction.
Database normalization is the process of structuring a relational database in accordance with a series of normal forms to reduce data redundancy and improve data integrity.
It was first proposed by British computer scientist Edgar F.
Codd as part of his relational model.
A database index is a data structure that improves the speed of data retrieval operations on a database table at the cost of additional writes and storage space to maintain the index data structure.
Indexes are used to quickly locate data without having to search every row in a database table every time said table is accessed.
Indexes can be created using one or more columns of a database table, providing the basis for both rapid random lookups and efficient access of ordered records.
A stored procedure is a subroutine available to applications that access a relational database management system (RDBMS).
Such procedures are stored in the database data dictionary.
In computing, a firewall is a network security system that monitors and controls incoming and outgoing network traffic based on configurable security rules.
A firewall typically establishes a barrier between a trusted network and an untrusted network, such as the Internet or between several VLANs.
Firewalls can be categorized as network-based or host-based.
An intrusion detection system (IDS) is a device or software application that monitors a network or systems for malicious activity or policy violations.
Any intrusion activity or violation is typically either reported to an administrator or collected centrally using a security information and event management (SIEM) system.
A SIEM system combines outputs from multiple sources and uses alarm filtering techniques to distinguish malicious activity from false alarms.
Researchers tend to classify malware into one or more sub-types.
Ransomware is a type of malware that encrypts the victim's personal data until a ransom is paid.
Difficult-to-trace digital currencies such as paysafecard or Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies are commonly used for the ransoms, making tracing and prosecuting the perpetrators difficult.
Sometimes the original files can be retrieved without paying the ransom due to implementation mistakes, leaked cryptographic keys or a complete lack of encryption in the ransomware.
Phishing is a form of social engineering and a scam where attackers deceive people into revealing sensitive information or installing malware such as viruses, worms, adware, or ransomware.
Phishing attacks have become increasingly sophisticated and often transparently mirror the site being targeted, allowing the attacker to observe everything while the victim navigates the site, and traverses any additional security boundaries.
Phishing remains the most prevalent type of cybercrime globally.
Dynamic programming (DP) is both a mathematical optimization method and an algorithmic paradigm.
The method was developed by Richard Bellman in the 1950s and has found applications in numerous fields, such as aerospace engineering and economics.
In computer science, a priority queue is an abstract data type similar to a regular queue where each element has an associated priority determining its order of service.
Priority queue serves highest priority items first.
Priority values have to be instances of an ordered data type, and higher priority can be given either to the lesser or to the greater values with respect to the given order relation.
For example, in the Java standard library, the PriorityQueue class considers the lowest element with respect to their order as having the highest priority.
In computer science, a double-ended queue, is an abstract data type that serves as a container, with a restricted access to the stored items.
As a generalization of both the stack and the queue, the deque may have similar functions as a data buffer: it can be use both as a retainer (queue), or for backtracking (stack).
However it offers greater flexibility in managing the order of elements and some algorithms are based on its functionalities.
In computer science, a circular buffer, circular queue, cyclic buffer or ring buffer is a data structure that uses a single, fixed-size buffer as if it were connected end-to-end.
This structure lends itself easily to buffering data streams.
There were early circular buffer implementations in hardware.
In mathematics, the Pythagorean theorem or Pythagoras's theorem is a fundamental relation in Euclidean geometry between the three sides of a right triangle.
It states that the area of the square whose side is the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the areas of the squares on the other two sides.
In number theory, Fermat's Last Theorem states that there are no positive integers  with  such that .
The cases  and  have been known since antiquity to have infinitely many solutions.
The fundamental theorem of calculus is a theorem that links the concept of differentiating a function with the concept of integrating a function.
Roughly speaking, the two operations can be thought of as inverses of each other.
Bayes' theorem, named after Thomas Bayes, gives a mathematical rule for inverting conditional probabilities, allowing the probability of a cause to be found given its effect.
For example, with Bayes' theorem, the probability that a patient has a disease given that they tested positive for that disease can be found using the probability that the test yields a positive result when the disease is present.
The theorem was developed in the 18th century by Bayes and independently by Pierre-Simon Laplace.
In probability theory, the central limit theorem (CLT) states that, under appropriate conditions, the distribution of a normalized version of the sample mean converges to a standard normal distribution.
This holds even if the original variables themselves are not normally distributed.
There are several versions of the CLT, each applying in the context of different conditions.
In probability theory, the law of large numbers is a mathematical law which states that the average of the results obtained from a large number of independent random samples converges to the true value, if it exists.
More formally, the law of large numbers states that given a sample of independent and identically distributed values, the sample mean converges to the true mean.
Quantum error correction (QEC) comprises a set of techniques used in quantum memory and quantum computing to protect quantum information from errors arising from decoherence and other sources of quantum noise.
QEC schemes that employ codewords stabilized by a set of commuting operators are known as stabilizer codes, and the corresponding codewords are referred to as quantum error-correcting codes (QECCs).
